So the 17th this morning, demonstrators blocked of access to the Brian administration building, and after that, picket lines were established around Ballantine and Rolls halls. Five students met with a group of administrators this morning and agreed to maintain open picket lines, permitting these students who desired to attend classes at least access until this meeting took place. Now, coming onto the podium, we're onto the stage. We see President Sudden Chancellor Carter on the moderator of this afternoon's meeting, Professor of Law Harry, credit everything. Also seated on the stage, his student body president. Gentlemen, keep Parker. My name is Harry prouder. I'm just a poor professor of law, and I hope to be able to be literally a moderator for this meeting. I've been on the campus Brian Hall since 7 30 in the morning. I know there are deep divisions among us quite frequently during the day when students were asked what their plans were and students were asked what's likely to happen. I heard one response. That response. Wass. It is up to the individual conscience of the end of the person. It is up to his moral conscience. That explanation is appealing to me I consider the moral conscious to be the most legitimate source, the values and actions and because I heard that phrase because I am committed to it. I too want to appeal to your moral conscience, I asked. Even though there are divisions among us, I understand that feelings are lacerated. I understand we are living in a tense world. I understand some of the ugliness that's occurred on campuses and in the rest of the world. And I also understand that there is hope for the world that there are occasions when certain differences must be set aside. If there is any chance of agreement of understanding, a bit of building a better world, we must not lose those aspects of civilization we have gained for so long. This society is sick and very many ways, but it is not incurable. And we are gathered together today to make one manifestation of rationality. We can learn, we can talk, we can discuss. We can exchange, weaken, build, be better for it. Well, your leader used the word love. It done meadows. We use the word peace. We use the word people and I asked you to remember those words I asked you to convert this an occasion that we can all be proud of first, then will be a statement by president suffered then a statement by Chancellor Carter. Then I understand the student leaders will make statements. Then I hope to be able to recognize people from the floor you'll recognize no matter how affair I want to be. No matter how much I will want to recognize people of different views how difficult this will be for me In a sense we must discipline ourselves in this audience. I should also announce that is the kind of meeting that we must have a time limit. It will be there are issues which I don't think I can be talked over and over again. I hope that in the hour allowed it on our from the first speaker, we will be able to clarify enough. Let us see what happens in the hour. Let us agreeance first that we will last talked last for another hour. I think something has to be understood right now that this meeting is for the benefit of the students and I feel that for students to get us much out of this the moderator should be a student. And we can We can supply a student from the law school to moderates. Law school will still be in moderate. That was Keith Parker making a move that indicated that he wanted a student to moderate this afternoon's meeting. There's now a discussion taking place on the stage trying to decide the prime Waller is a student of mine. I am his teacher. Wei have Wait. Got along very well. And I think he I think he got a B plus, which is one of which is one of the highest grades I've ever given. I have no doubts about in commercial law, one of the dollars subjects ever taught. And if if we could get along and that we can get along and moderating and we will share these duties will be in constant consultation. And we were so a student, Dale pry. Well, a student of law will be told some co hosting. We will fortify each other and he will for to find me even more than I him art bullshit. Okay, okay. We're good. This is the format we're gonna follow. I've got one announcement to make and we're gonna hear a short short statements from President Sutton and Chancellor Carter and then Keith. Michael make short statements and we're gonna have a question and answer, period. Now, my announcement concerns what happened this morning. There were eight people that were arrested outside Brian Hall and they were all charged with, um, misdemeanor disorderly conduct. Except for one who is also charged with disregarding a police signal. Now, bond Bond has been set at $50. We need $400 at least for bond. And we need more than that for our defense. Uh, we've got one of the law professors starting on the case, and he's handling so far. Professor Short horse. He's handled a lot of student problems. He deserves a round of applause. So those of you who were asked a little bit earlier if you have motorcycle helmets, will you either passed them around yourselves? Or will you give them to nearby marshals who have white shirts and green bands and the moral force of marshals? Of course. Um, and, uh, while this whole thing is going on, we're gonna try and recent money and get those kids out of jail back here with us. They weren't arrested fairly, anyway. Yeah. Keith says not nickels and dimes. We need some money. All all the money is gonna go to the student government defense Fund. We're gonna use it for bail and defenses for stuff that happens around here on campus. Okay, President, suddenly you want to start? Yes. First I wish to I undressed myself, too. Uh, a statement attributed to me in various ways in the in various newspapers. Can you hear me Sign, uh, attributed to me in various newspapers on DH. None of these newspapers quote quotations as seemed to agree among themselves. This has to do for the speech, which I gave in Evansville, Indiana. Now, if you won't, uh, if you won't think that I'm I'm, uh, indulging you anything. I will tell you, uh, what happened briefly and then tell you what I actually said in this connection, I went to Evansville, Indiana, to address an alumni group to talk about educational problems that I foresee in the year 2,000. When I arrived. Well, I mean, just bear with me, please. And on DH, then you gonna hit me when I'm finished? Uh, hits me. Now, if you like. But when I arrived, I found that there was apprehension in among, uh, a significant number of people attending that meeting about what was going on and blooming there. Question usually gets put to me. What the hell is going on and blooming? And so I addressed myself to that, pointing out that what the hell was going on in Bloomington and I'm summarizing here I have a been peaceful b had been the result of the concern of not only, uh, young people who are considered to be on the left if there is such a thing. But young people clear across the spectrum of political opinion and the thing that concerned them wass the war. And they were making a moral and peaceful protest to indicate their concern and in many cases, their disdain for what was happening in Vietnam. I told them that they had every reason to be proud of the students and the entire academic community of Indiana University. This was followed. I'm this is summer. And, uh, I, uh, since I was giving an extemporaneously, I don't have any notes. Uh, there was a question and answer period following. Oh, I should have also add that I stated that it was the policy agreed upon by the administration that the university would remain open for those students who wish to attend that those students who did not wish to attend and who felt some moral obligation to go out and do something else be it demonstrate or go back to their hometowns and talk to their, uh, elected representatives. So their friends and neighbors So on, uh, we're free to do so, uh, and that, uh uh, then there was this was followed by a question and answer, period. The question that miss it'd the unfortunate and conflicting quotations. Or is the question would you, under any circumstances, closed the university? And my answer to that was not that, uh, after I can't remember all the adjectives, bloody mayhem, death and destruction it sector had occurred, but that I would certainly close the university on my own initiative if I felt that the lives of students, faculty or citizens were endangered bye, any activity or if there were threatened, our possibilities of grave damage to property. Now, that is what I said and I want to get that cleared up. I was reported in one paper. I want I won't get into that. There were conflicting reports about what I said, but that is in fact, uh, not forbade him because I don't remember the vapor verbatim statement. But that is what I said. Now let me get on to the second part of my statement because I know that you will have a lot of questions that you will wish to raise what Both myself and Chancellor Carter. I feel that my obligation, and indeed responsibility, is to provide an educational opportunity in the classroom for those students who wish such an opportunity. Uh, I do not feel, therefore, that I can close the university because these students wish to attend classes and there are many. Thousands have paid their fees and have every right to expect that. What they paid for they will get. It's their bag. It's what they want to do. It's what the institution was originally set up to do, and that's my obligation. On the other hand, on the other hand, I do not feel that those students who, out of reasons of conscience, I wish to go out and knew something else providing it is does not interfere with the rights of others to do their thing should in any way be interfered with and so long as they do not interfere with the rights of others to do their thing. I feel it is a cz much the obligation of the university to protect those who are doing something else as it is to protect those who attend class. Chancellor Carter. I'll try to keep. Can you hear me? I'll try to keep my comments relatively brief because they relates largely to a question of attitude relating to the two, initially the student government demands which were made of the president some time back on 2 May 1 and then followed by a referendum run by the students on this item, which also went to faculty members and the staff. There was set of demands here, and I want to speak to them very briefly. The first a man presented was that the university repudiate President Nixon's plans for Southeast Asia on demand. The immediate withdrawal the crowd has risen to its feet as Chancellor Carter read that one demand from the referendum and in mess get out of here. It's obvious what you're sentiment is now. These demands were presented to the president of the university. I'm going to speak first as a faculty member, not as a chancellor have the president of this university made a statement in behalf of this university stating this kind of repudiation, I would have moved a censure and I would have moved it for a damn simple reason. He's appointed as president to preside over the educational policy and direction of this institution, not to make statements for those of us on the faculty or among the students with relation to foreign policy. I think I happen to personally old that view of the faculty as well. The faculty is a corporate body concerned with scholarship and learning. Its function is different. It has a large. It has a large number of alternatives open for protest for demonstration at all kinds of matters which relate to political activities, but not as a corporate body. Number two was to end the campus complicity and Southeast Asia and opened the books of the foundation to supply information on government contracts. The books of the foundations on government contracts have been opened for years. It is very simple to get access to the records on government contracts of this university. One, they're published list, which come out periodically identifying the contract. Secondly, it is possible to examine the contract in the office of Dean Merit. The only thing that is withheld on the statement of the contracts is those sections of the budget which relate to the individual salaries of investigators. This has been the case here for years and year after year we have had to repeat the same message. The books on government contracts are open. Number three with relation of the financial commitment to the Bobby Seale Defense Fund is a simple thing. Diane, Sir. Individual students, faculty and others could make contributions to this defense fund. It is illegal to take general fund money and make contributions of this kind. I personally don't want to go to Michigan Study right now. Number four Doubt with bringing increasing the percentage of black students in the university in accordance with the percentage of the black people in the state of Indiana. I'm I'm shocked, let you applaud. Why not more? The blunt the blank chose of the matter is that we have been working on increasing the number of black students in this university. Vice Chancellor and Hudson and I are now to prepare a plan to try to further increase the number of black students. I think there is a mythology here that you want to set quotas. You don't want to set quotas. You want to take people in and educate him and you want to increase numbers. We know that we have a smaller proportion, a number of black students now than we had in the 19 fifties. Our intention is to do something about it and we've been meeting with the black student leaders on it. Let's let him finish up what he has to say. Please, we have met with the black student leaders on it and we are working constructively at it. The other thing that ended on the on the referendum was to close the university. The student vote I was 9,000 plus two seven 1,000 plus. Yes, the faculty vault was 3/4 plus No, The blunt truth of the matter is, however, why should the rights of those who wish to go on be turned off by the fact of the majority rule? I am not. Come on Can we have a little quiet, please? Now, President Sutton has spoken before of our concern that those who really wish to withdraw from the classes and do other things of a constructive nature and relation to making their political positions, You know that we are concerned to protect their rights. I'm quite willing to say that I will. I find the faculty Council resolution passed yesterday urging the faculty to pay particular attention to this and to take steps when they can to provide that academic penalties are not felt by the students. There is, however, a myth in this system which I find startling that administrators can issue orders to faculty about this. They can't and they never have been able to. Um, before Keith and Mike speak, I'd like to do one other thing. I lied. I'd like to read you the names of those people who were arrested and tell you that if any of you know anything, if you were a witness, if you were there, you know these people. You saw something. Go to the student government office and write down on a piece of paper. Who we are, where we can get in touch with you What you were doing while you were there. Name's anything you can remember While I'm reading the names I'd like to invite President satin. Chancellor Carter. Mr Prouder too. Should be fun. Those those people arrested currently President Sutton on Chancellor Carter have refused that. Those people arrested were William Curly, Paul Dobbs, Susan Young, Gregor, Harry Hess, Steve Emery, Roger Knolton, Mike Jones and John calls. Uh, I hope we can all give him our moral ends. Any kind of support you can give him. Okay, uh, our next speaker is vice presidents Didn't body my king. Yeah. Forgive me, Father, if it's takes a little time, there is quite a bit of correction and, uh, addition to the minutes to be made. No, I want to talk first about President Sutton. Statement from I said, uh, there's no exact figures is true. All of the tone of a statement was a little different when it was read yesterday. Um, there's some some things that he did leave out that I think people should know. Um and we have contacted the Evansville Press, and, uh, they have told us that, uh, he can deny it all he wants, but it's our word against his, Um this is this is from the Evansville Press reporter willing to testify for these notes that she took things that quote here. He told the alumni that I you will remain open unless and I quote great violence causing bodily harm or possible death and grievous property damages forces me to close it. But it will be bloody mayhem before I will close it. And if I close it, I will close it good and proper. And this is something left out here. Salaries will seize and things will come to a standstill. And it will stay close till I'm good and ready to open it. I wasn't appointed president of the university to deny anybody the right to an education, no matter how reasonable. Oh, harsh Oda strike requested this song. I will not permit it now. It's not. It's not only students that were a little upset about this statement. Uh, faculty were a little upset that, uh, there's so many first person pronouns here. Um, but I think some of the other things that were mentioned here, uh, during his talk Ah, little instructive. This from the Evansville courier now, um, under headline I, you president determined to keep the school open? Um, although there are a couple of students in the eye you student government whom Sudden admittedly doesn't like. He said the leader so far of ask students to obey rules and avoid violence. I can't believe it. It may not last, but it has upto up until now, he said, the ice students generally don't like the present student government whose leader calls himself a self styled Black Panther Militants. Um, it goes on talking about how, uh, students ran Mark read off campus. And then here's another section. It's kind of useful in view of the people who were arrested today, Uh, he believes there are about, and this was also in the hell telephone. People check on this, too, and you can check with the reporters. He believes that there are about 50 students on the campus dedicated to violent destructive acts who may be able to raise 200 to 400 more for additional support. The rest of fine young men and women who are concerned about the war and other problems. Now I want to point out that whoever those 50 students are dedicated to violent, destructive acts, but they're not uniform. They do not carry four foot clubs. They're not dressed up in riot gear that they do not have, but they do not have to half tracks poised on the edge of town, as was done last week by state police. Uh, and if anybody violence comes to this campus, that's where it's gonna come from those police, Um, he said he has heard talk that some of us, some of the out of town students believe. I believe if I use stays open, it will break the national strike, Sutton said. There's no way of telling who are the out of town students. Luckily, Bloomington is a small town and cannot accommodate many out of town people, he said. Not now, Before I lead into this next part, I want to emphasize, um uh, that into meetings that Keith and I had with the president. And, uh, you heard him say again today, uh, that he would not make a statement on foreign policy and at this time, not even as an individual, because because he knew he knew he knew that his name could not be dissociated from the fact that he was president of Indiana University. Now he made that statement Keith tonight twice, and he's been making it repeatedly. Uh, this is what occurred, uh, at the Evansville alumni meeting, according to you having to go through here. Students have asked him to denounce the move into Cambodia. But Satin, who lived in Thailand for three years as a special adviser to the government, said quote, I don't even have the facts yet. I'm a professional in this field, and I cannot make a decision without the facts and quotes. And then and then the final statement of the article, which is not a direct quote. We're trying to run down a direct quote. He said, however, that he personally favors to move himself, although he would not make such a statement as value president. This after promising that he would never make such a state so that it is not a question here of a political university vs politics. Invading university is the question of Mr Sutton's politics versus politics. People in university. Finally, I want to say that, uh, in view of this statement at Keith and I released yesterday at this meeting, uh, is the responsibility of many other concerns. Student. I was I was home preparing for a class when I found out that, uh, friends of mine have been arrested. Uh, I want to say that I want I was I was proud of those students taking a stand. I was proud of faculty taking a stand out there, and I think it's about time the rest of university takes a stand. Good. Yeah. My co moderator and I agreed that President Sultan should have an opportunity to respond before Mr Parker makes his remarks. I did not say I've made No, I made no comment. Pro con on the, uh, present campaign in Cambodia. Yeah. We're gonna get to questions in a second way. Have one more speaker. A man whose conduct is it has been exemplary in the past weekend. President of your student body, Keith Parker. The audience is once again rising to its feet and greeting to Parker has been setting fires edge of the table set up on stage. Now the president of student body keep park. All I can say that is right on what I have to say will not take much time because I think Michael said, uh enough. And I've said enough in the past. And I think now many of you I have things to say that a closer, you know what needs to be said and a very important also, but I'd like to speak first. Tio one prize demands the demand on Bobby Seale that we never said money would be taken out. The general fund, you know, it's implement this. We said that means be made to raise money. Now the people of Indiana, no matter how beautiful they may be, are not yet at the point where they can relate to chipping into Bobby Seale defense. Fine now. So this is why we understood this clearly from the start and head in our heads that he means to raise money now in terms of the statement that Mike and I made yesterday. And I said, You know, that said that Well, if Mike and I have to be policemen, then we might as well move into Brian Hall. What I was speaking in terms up was that I think, and I said, that's enough times that Mike and I are going to have to do all these jobs on campus that our officers might as well be in the president's office in Brian 200 and if and I say it again it if those offices were up for reelection, Mike and I would run for those two. So the purpose the purpose of people being here today is too once run what is on their minds directly to those people who should have some answers. Everyone has to understand this. Everyone has to understand that you do have a right to speak out, that no one could deny you this right. And if the rights of those who want to attend classes are to be protected, the rights of those who want to speak out must be protected. So I don't want to take up too much more time. But I'm going to say is that I'm still on strike into those beautiful people that Brian and Balance I and all around today, all power to the people you're listening to live coverage of the Student Administration forum were now Paul 10 seconds for station identification. Well, we'll get questions from the floor and are the floor microphones on? Do they have enough lead to carry him back to people there. Now speak questions being accepted from the floor. If you can't get to a microphone and shock loud enough for us up here to here, we can repeat your question. What? You'll have your chance. That's okay. Principally. This was to be a question and answer session for President Sutton and Chancellor Carter. So if we could keep to that, uh, everybody here would appreciate. And I know they were right in the front in the middle. Yell your question. Look, my quest is the people who are leading the strike, but I have a glorious rhetoric about respecting people's rights. I wondering seriously what action is to be taken by the student government that is obviously leading the strike to stop people from pushing people, which is assault battery. I understand pushing people pushing bricks of people in closing doors. Now, this is a violation of rights. Like to know what's going to be done. Okay, Mike? Yeah, it's fine. Strike today goes, uh, you have to talk to people that we're running a strike that were on the strike lines. I was not a student, but I want to say I want to stay a little bit about. I want to say that, uh, I was picketing on Friday, and, uh, I was pushed around and shoved around and assaulted around is, you know, he's, uh, a cz. Muchas scabs were, uh, by scabs going through the line. I think I think that, you know, can we give her the microphone and letter? She wants to sharpen the question. I know I'm not an answer to this question. You are demanding that the administration give answers. You're demanding that the administration gives action. I'd like some action that prevents my class thief. Now, I'd like to hold this mike and represent the people who have not been heard from until I get an answer for action. Let's keep on this issue. All right. Worries. One at a time. As we clearly said, picket lines, our picket lines to be defined by the picketers. We do not have individual strings on every picketer. We made it clear we made it clear they would you be defined by such now we call for open picket lines of people decided they believe stark enough to close those lines. It is there choice. And that's all I had to say. I'm Chancellor Carter will respond. May I simply say that I'm in full agreement with you and that I hope that you have these difficulties. I don't think they can hear you. You will let us know that the truth of the matter is I do not see how in the name of acts against repression you repress people. And it seems to me that this has happened on some of the clothes in the in the yellow shirt. No, behind you. Can somebody pass him on? Mike, I can't wait. Repeat it. We'll go ahead. The factual premise is wrong. Do you want to rephrase your question? Yes. The question has been answered in the way. No, this gentleman right there, Janet Number. I called on him to be next. Just so you won't think I'm ducking the issue. I won't tell you this at the last Bloomington council meeting. This this policy's decided campus by campus and we have sent it at the last brewing's in campus meeting. The Bloomington Faculty Council took action and made a recommendation to the faculty at line. And I will now, uh uh I do not oppose this recommendation. In a matter of fact, it's quite in accordance with academic tradition, as I have known it. Now, Chancellor Kaga, I'll give you the details if you little lying to do so, uh, quickly. What was passed was a resolution which essentially urged that faculty hey, serious attention to finding means by which students would not suffer undue academic penalties for participation in political protest for going back home and so forth to talk to people. The options on this are not spelled out in the Faculty Council resolution because the various divisions of the Bloomington campus have different kinds of rule patterns on parts of their veins. The College of Arts and Sciences Policy Committee, as I understand, already made some suggestions connecting that this the law school faculty was prepared to meet on this today. I think the business school faculty is about to meet their various alternatives, but I think you may get different things developed in different places. Obviously, the incomplete is one with a deferred examination that might be a possibility. It's easy to do for an instructor. Some pass fail relationships may be done. Uh, as I say there, their various options are right. But it is up to the individual faculty member to accept the recommendations which come to him because grating actresses around here have always stayed with the individual faculty member. Uh, Chuck Turner was next. Yes, I like it. I have some at least two questions I'd like to ask, and the 1st 1 has to do with nonviolence. We've heard a great deal about nine non violence on this campus. And I'd like to know who is responsible for calling police on this campus. We have. We have it from Mayor Hooker. That someone in administration by police on this campus. Is that true? No matter who called the police on this campus way, I am ultimately responses because I'm president of Indiana University, sir. Wait. Can we Can we let Chuck asking questions? Me? I'm saying you can blame me for it. This is great sentiment on campus that what's the responsibility for what violence that was that did occur today had to do with the presence of police. It's well known that the presence of uniform officers tend to incite situations, and we'd like to know we'd like We'd like to have your assurance that the police will not be called on the campus again. For just this reason, if you will give me insurance that I don't get, you can pick it all you want to. But if you prevent people from going about their appointed tasks and do not allow them to to do this And after I patiently waited for several hours and don't think this is gonna go have some back leg and you were there. The picketers were requested to vacate the doorways and where I am told and farm that they could go to a formal open picketing right to protect the lives property of yours and mine one second, Mister Mister turns size Mike. My second question has to do with ROTC. More than a year ago, the arson science there was a committee of the Division of Arts and Sciences, which was composed of fact students, as I understand, which turn a report in which favored, uh, position that no credit should be given far OTC work at that time at that time and all University Council Committee was appointed, as I understand, by by yourself at that time. About a year ago, when the report came in, and all university committee was appointed. And I have it that that committee has turned in a report to you. All right, that you have access to the findings of the committee. And they, uh, that report has gone to the faculty council for its consideration and recommendation. The recommendation was that I don't remember the details, but what you want to know is did they recommended they recommend the abolition of Auntie Z or not? And the answer is, they did not. What about credit for all T c credit? Uh, Miss Turner, can I speak to one point? Because the arts and science report a year ago, I did not say no credit for OTC. What it did was to make a recommendation to the faculty of the College of Arts and Sciences that work in ROTC should not count within that portion of the students total program that must be taken within the College of Arts and Sciences. It does placed it in the same category as some of the other crisis and professional schools. Ah, that it could be taken, but within the maximum allowed by the College of Arts and Sciences to that point it did not propose any immediate ending of credit. It had some long run proposals about our PC, of which were to be phased over a period of time. It was sent to an all university committee because ROTC is relevant not only to the faculty of the college and the students within the college, but to all other students within the various divisions. One last quick question. Then I will release my I'd like to know if all the eye you books are open to public and including sources and uses of funds. And if not, why not? You published, sirs Eyes, eh? There is a a public accounting of all university use of funds made to the state of Indiana and those become public documents and therefore are open. What about the foundation? I recognize the gentleman on the stage here. The foundation is honored of annually by a firm from outside the institution and the report of that Ana is available in the foundation office people I'm representing veterans for peace in certain students Law school, they These are not ordinary times. This has not been an ordinary week, and I don't think that ordinary responses from the administration are appropriate. I think that the situation which Indiana University finds itself in today demands an extraordinary response. I may turn some of you off, but I want to say very clearly that I do not support closed picket lines. But if those lines were not closed this morning, we would not be here today. Once again, the audience is rising to its feet, showing solidarity least on this point. The emphasis being student demands are only met by confrontation. Now, I don't know how many of you read the daily student this morning, but I had a long essay in which was which was titled At the Top. Don't shut down the university If any of you please. If any of you read further than the title, you would see that the important part of that recommendation of that essay was the recommendation, not the title. My recommendation was basically the Yale plan, which I'll let me explain in just a second. It was given to Chancellor Carter personal copy yesterday and the Dean Harvey personal copy yesterday and all of you who read the student this morning and an opportunity to see it. I do not believe because of my deep ingrain civil libertarian principles. Having lived in the South for many years, I do not believe in unbridled majority rule. I do believe in preservation of the rights of the minority, and therefore, I don't think that the university should be closed down for everyone. I think that it should. It should continue in existence, business as usual for those who want it that way. Wait till I finish. But just saying, as the administration has made a pass at so far that they will attempt to protect the rights of those who don't agree is not enough. I understand completely that the you know, the university administration cannot order the faculty to do anything, and I wouldn't have it any other way. But I think they can clearly make their feelings known that they agree with the recommendation to each individual school to each individual school to handle any way they see fit to allow those of us you want to go out in the community who want to go to Washington who want to speak right lobby in our own way, Or did you do more constructive things during the next three weeks? than take exams to do so, and it should be a clear recommendation from both the president and the chancellor that their classes will be waived. Exams will be waived and credit will be given automatically. I do not believe in the productivity's of interfering with the rights of those who have, sometimes for very sound. Pragmatic reasons are here at great personal expense, either to themselves or to others. I think they should be able to continue to go to class and continue to take exam. And But I think that the university has an obligation taken within the broadest possible context of what's been going on in the country in the last 10 days to see this step as an extraordinary step, perhaps for this state and this administration, but as a very minor step taken when we consider the alternative and I think they have an obligation to say yes, while I would not ordinarily do so. These are extraordinary times and I recommend to the end to the other school leaders that they do that they do exactly this. I would like to say I have the highest regard for this man from working with him uh, he spent 12 years in the Air Force, resign his commission last year because it was ethically unjustifiably. And he's president of the student body of the law class and he's a member with me of the Veterans of Peace. We've got a reply from Chancellor Carter to Mr Boyle again, I thought, I excuse me. I thought I had already said. But in my judgment recommendations come on that I personally favored the recommendation made by the Faculty Council yesterday, which went straight in the direction, which is indicated, I think, by this last part of the comments, I'm sorry I had received the letter is yet No, but I've been a little busy. There's a brief and I'll swell. Just Diamond will make about the students who were arrested. I'm Chris Logan from the English Department, and, uh, Tom shorn Horst and Shelly Geller and Peter Linton. Bomb and I just came from the jail. The people who were arrested are out. They they have been arraigned on, uh uh, $50 bond has been released on $50 bail of peace foreign dollars. The, uh, bail money was raised by the faculty on DH, but there's one very important point about this. And, uh, it's only because of the crowded conditions that Tom Shortlist isn't talking to you because we didn't all wanna march down here. Uh, Tom is very concerned. Tom represents the eight students in court. From now on on, Tom is very much concerned that you all know that the judge made a particular effort, and we mean it's quite seriously to set the bonds as low as possible. Uh, they could have been at $500 a piece with the idea that there is going to be some reciprocation to this from our part that, in other words, the implication was quite clear that if anybody's going to get me busted tonight, it's not gonna be $50. It's gonna be 500 a piece. We all know that. But oh, all I can say is, uh, I don't think we can raise $500 apiece for a number of students from now, so I hope you'll keep us in mind. Thank you. We counted the money back stage and we were able to collect $446.80. No, um, since those premises have been bailed out. I think that it would be beneficial for us to put this into a permanent fund, because, uh, this little ideas run around in my head is going to be used again. And what I like to make one more announcement about the teaching tonight, seven. PM right here. You know, in Auditorium and the main speakers would be Professor Stand Mitt. Slack on containment. Vietnam. Professor Edwards, Sermon on American Servicemen, Indochinese War Professor Julius Getman, Vietnam and political dissent. Professor George Juergens. Domestic minutes of Vietnam and Keys. Parker, The Black Panthers and political repression. They'll be workshops to follow. And then there'll be a rap obsession in the auditorium. After works out, I promised the gentleman who asked the first question that he would be recognized later. And I do. So now, just keep shouting or repeat your question. Life? No, right. What Silent majority plays up? The speaker finished mourning. Please let the speaker finish. Well, one here, please. Please, Rick, please reach. Please reach the point of your question. The just a minute, please. The issue of the rights of those who want to go to class have been raised by several speakers have been responded to. I don't think that particular statement will These more comments we will not recognize other question gentleman right there. I'm not an expert on luck of people feel because I know they feel Can we let President Satin finish the answer, please? Because I know they feel many things. But if you're question is to me, do I respect people's feelings and thereby let me see you how to put that? No, I am not afraid. Afraid of the backlash. Like let with the microphone. Uh, this this whole topic keeps coming back up about the vote and what it meant or the referendum. And I still don't think the question was really answered a moment ago when, uh, you said there would be recommendations about students who had voted to dissent are voted to strike. You said there would be recommendations made and there same time was the statement by the law professor who said these air many times in view of the fact that they are and you, Khun, guarantee people's rights to go to class, why cannot you can t the rights of those people who wish to dissent Now this is really a Bloomington campus matter. Oh, hell, he's willing to talk to, but I want to try to enter this as directly as I can answer it. Because I was there at the council discussion and he was not because it's a Bloomington faculty council and I preside and he's not a member. I'm out. Mike, may I answer the question? I think basically what I've tried to get across before is the administration is not authorized to make these decisions by itself. What happened was the council recommended this kind of thing to the faculty is a hole. What is happening is that in division after division, as faras I get reports they are taking it up. As I said, I think the Arts Arts and Sciences college already has tried to deal with this through its elected policy committee. Uh, on the law school is meeting. I know the business school is planning to me, but I can't reach in and tell them what they must do. I can do what I said earlier and express, eh, sentiment of sympathy for the position. But they're goingto have to do it. Excuse me, but I would like to also ask in connection with that. Is this a democratic institution? And if it is so called, and how come those two ideas be reconciled? Is it a corporate interest or institution? And do you reconcile corporate interests with democratic ideals and principles, or are they separate? There was a vote in a recommend referendum taken here, and the majority of the students voted. That's that's democratic. I I always thought it wass. I'm proud of you. This is a very difficult and profound question that's raised. Democracy is not so simple that its dimensions are self evident. The question about majority vote is a question of what belongs on the agenda. Do you want by majority vote to strip the people of their constitutional rights? The whole point of a democracy is that it has limits. The whole point of a democracy is our constitutional protections for certain minorities. I wasn't as educated people as people are attempting to understand our society. We must begin to understand what we mean by democracy in a more complicated way than all questions are resolved. Okay, so there are issues us to one. Items can be put on the agenda. The answer's along the line of every question has been the way are trying to walk a path. We are trying to develop programs that do protect the rights of the students who have dissented the rights of the students who feel incapable taking exams. I just came from a law school meeting where we have special constraints on how much we can relieve our students. But we are struggling with this problem. I know that arts and signs we can at least agree that we cannot take action. When the campus is a seriously split in the student vote by a mere majority vote principle, we can adjust matters in terms of grades and credits has been suggested that would do justice to both. That's the point of this meeting we have made and up an impact on how money this how many of the students feel strongly that this university cannot merely continue? We have shown we have done things, and we can do it without creating bitterness in those who perhaps don't feel that on these issues, their their rights can be compromised by the majority. Mr. Braddock, I would like tio like to ask, you know, as a moderator, you know why you running all this? Because the moderator should be sitting here. Point out people who ask questions and I'm running all these comments and then I have one more. I have one more question to ask myself. It's in two parts. Although President Setting is assume responsibility for for asking for the police to come. Who was the person that called the police? Who was this person? And second of all, why are we sitting up here on the stage with various members of that same police for us behind us, armed to the gills? What? You want to handle that one? Let's say I called him good. Just a minute. Uh, I I was carried away. I apologize. I did it in the best interest of trying to reach you. Understand? It took to compensate for my default. I last by moderator if he wants equal time. Not that. Why here? Yeah, that question was answered me once before. Now, let me tell you this, and I know I know that you're anything I say about this. However, reason moment, it seems to me, is going to meet a some kind of hostility response on the part ofyou Automatic. The safety division of Indiana University is trained. You don't want to hear the answer. Let's forget it, are trained and instructed to protect the lives. All right. Hey, let's let's let the man finish at least I mean, you don't have to like what he says, but let him get it out. That's right. I know in advance that many of your not gonna like what I say, but they are trained and advised and instructed to be as sensitive and as careful in the protection of your lives as they can be. Pardon me. The Harvey Report is being implemented as rapidly as it can be implemented. I want now, here again. You want to hear it like it is. I do not at this time plan to recommend that the guns be removed from the police force. Good. It's like you asked me the question and I answered it. I'd like to ask a question pertaining to a certain create on court neutrality of this university. I'm sure President Sutton is aware, since he was there for three years. Of what? This unity, Uh, this university does in the Thailand project. And I'd like to throw a few facts out about that. Thailand has not had a free election in 20 years. This university has spent one point $3,000,000 to send people Thailand to train people over in Thailand now spares the question of rot. C is concerned if you check out the quote of military leaders of this country, they say the United States government could not wage war or whatever they call it an overseas country for wasn't fair. The ROTC program 70% of the officers in the United States Army in Vietnam. Uh, TC graduates. Now, if you people are wrapped up in a civil liberties thing about T. C dig it right on. But I think the civil liberties of the Vietnamese people and the Cambodian people to live would not be a napalm. Dawn, I'm marking a Payless is more important. This stone in right here, please. You want to respond? It's alright. Did you ask me a question about Thailand? All right. I will be glad to answer the question. The contract between the university and Thailand during the parade that I was there and subsequent to my return to this country is available and you may read it. Our problem covers purpose. There was twofold. One school of education was developing a college of education to train teachers for the children of Thailand throughout the country and open new schools. And that you can see in the contract. Well, I don't If they get educated, it's just propaganda clean. When I was asked what we were doing and you, if you want me to answer, I will complete the answer. And then again, you do your own thing. The other the other part. All right. No, I'm trying to. You're finished. Uh, the other's part of the contract. Most to train young administrators to go out into the country side of night. Thailand Much almost all roll almost all a grand and provide better service to these were all civilians. Better service to the peasants and the people of the of Thailand itself. I recognize the German right now. I might have let me go. No, I haven't finished. I haven't finished the answer because I want to tell you all I know about it as briefly as I can. How do you I mean, it was a question of serious one or not all right. Currently, Indiana University is in a consortium with the University of Wisconsin, The Michigan State University. Uh, the University of Minnesota. Uh, Indiana. Yes. They're all big 10 schools. Ah, well, I can't remember all of my hand, but they're being financed. Teo, help these wrong professors of economic statistics, et cetera. Agricultural economics. So four kind of this contract is financed by the Ford Foundation for the purposes of developing something, known as the National Institute of Development Administration. The purpose of that is described by the name they had the kind of government when I was there that had more school teachers than it had soldiers. Gentlemen, Right in front. Here. Quiet, please. Again, For some of you, this answer will not be satisfactory. But I will admit that I should have done that. And I didn't do it. No, I was not afraid. If I was afraid, I'm here. Oh, come on, knock it off. If you want to. Just I mean, if you want a badger me way, could go out, come out, badger me. I thought we were trying to get questions answered, and I'm answering the question. I made a mistake. That's all I'm fallible and I confessed to it. Fallibility. Cousin suddenly admitted to us that he should have met with students. Marty asked why he did not. No, I had a very big question to Chancellor. I believe that this question can also be answered yes or no. And first of all, uh, it's my understanding that also besides being chance where the joy of faculty member is that correct? I hope so, because that's all I've got 10 years within which you respond, which you respond under the understanding. But you are responding as a faculty member of this institution and not as its chancellor. To a question depends on the question. I asked the question. You have heard the plan presented, I believe. Do you understand it? I'm not sure if you may. Yeah, I've heard it. OK, I would like to read, but my question is, and I think it can be answered yes or no. As a faculty member of this institution, with the understanding that you're not responding as chancellor but as a faculty member, will you endorse the Yale plan? We're gonna give chance or Carter a few minutes to read it over. It's in the studio. May I read Brown right infront? Yeah. If it's not for another question. Yeah, I would. All right, now, please, everybody. All right, everybody in this place is getting a little pissed, but could I have your attention for just a minute, please? All right. Everybody's just a little bit tense. And my Greek blood is running a little hot too, but that doesn't mean I'm in the fraternity. That means my old man came over on the boat. What? All right, now, let's quit throwing the bullshit around and quit, you know, running around this little bush because you know, there's an issue, you see, and this issue comes up and from this issue come out a lot of little issues, you see, And all these people get pissed about these little things, like you watch CBS, you know, and you see these construction guys getting all uptight and some girl up here stands up and she's getting uptight. She's getting pushed around, but the issue is troops went into Cambodia. The issue is people are being killed right now. That's the issue. We're expanding. Now let's get back to the issue. The issue is not students that is a diversion. That's to make people in the back, Mr People up in the front. That's all it is. That's a diversion. That's bullshit. That's politics. Now, let's get down to an issue. Now, there's a lot of pissed people now. Alright, Mr Sutton, you represent this university, All right? You said this before. Okay, There's 9,000 people in this university that are pissed enough to show up to the poles. And that doesn't include your 12,040% of the people. United States didn't vote for the president. Big deal. Let me finish. All right, now you're responsible. Now, there's 9,000 people that are pissed enough to say we want something done. And then there's some other people that are twisted us. So they saying, you know well, you keep that down to a minimum. Okay? Now, wait a minute. Can I get this question all right now? All right. I mean, the figures speech. Right. Okay. Um, all right. This is for most people that are pissed at me in the back. Uh, I could shove you in any picket line, please, sir, I want your help. And now I want Mr Sutton's help. And I want your help. What are you gonna do with us? There's 9,000 people, if not more. What will you do? Know we're talking about our lives. Mr. People are gonna graduate. They're gonna have to go over to Cambodia. What will you do? The high post. Thank you. Well, you come to a t, Mr Mr Sutton. Whether you can't, you cannot get away from it. Whether you're president of this university or not, You're a person. And this thing about that my job doesn't enable me to feel. And toe act is a lot of bullshit. That's a lot of baloney. I recognize you dio as mistress, I'm asked. If you recognised people is people, will you give a chance to respond? You've made your point. You We know you made your point. Oh, what I feel is a human being is this and again I know I'm going to get it plays. I won't tell you exactly. My individual history feeling toward the war in 1958 when I returned from Thailand, I was greatly concerned with what I had seen as an almost unconscious policy commitment. Two military buildup in Southeast Asia that was going to lead to a major ground war. I made those statements in public and in print, and I made those that observation to as many people as I could contact as an assistant professor without tenure at this institution. However, I also felt that no adequate explanation explaining to the American people a that this was in the offing, and b it's precise purposes was ever made. Nor has it been made in my judge. Now that is not to say, I don't know. I won't let me finish my thought here, please. Well, that's about the signs of it. I guess that's that's the way I felt. Now I have my views in 1970 have not changed. Run it. But one of the things, All right, all right, have fun. One of the things that bugs me if you want to know how I feel is that there's an assumption on the part of a good many people in this country that Asia and Africa and the Near East is a matter of no relevance. They constantly concerned themselves primarily with European policy. It is a matter. It is inevitable in my judgment that if we do not build meaningful and peaceful relations between the peoples of Asia. Can I have a go? All right. Ha ha. That's funny, Bill. Peaceful relations bill. Peaceful relations with these people that we will eventually be destroyed by own thoughtlessness up. But I am not going to take an institutional stand on the Cambodian War. Just ladies aren't ladies and gentlemen. Originally, when we started, I said we would run for a knauer. We've already run for just a minute. We've already run for an hour and 20 minutes. We'll run till 5 30 I want to recognize the balcony. The German, Right over the sign there. I'm sorry I couldn't see you before. Yes. Goal. Hi. No, go. If this would mean if it the question once Princeton allows people to go home two weeks but before the campaign to help campaign for their congressman, is that not correct? I would have no objection to that policy whatsoever. Run! Give it If it if it will recommend it. And by the faculty who control the curriculum and the courses, then I would do it. I don't shake your head because that's the essence of the university. what? But I would have no objection to it. And uh, that's that's my answer As a member of the Faculty Council, I think there's a very good chance that this issue I have discussed this issue with other people and I think there is a great deal support. This is not. This is more important than the immediate issue. If we're going to enfranchise the students, if we're going to reduce the voting age to 18 if we're going to recognize that they're away from their communities and cannot legitimately participate, this is the best thing that's come along and education since going home to harvest the crops. I would like to tell you that yesterday at the Faculty Action Committee, I made a proposal which may help to answer the question that was raised. It wasn't addressed to me. I'm not credit president. Certain on the proposal, I made wass to, uh suggest to the political science department that they offer a course which would make it possible for students say to come here. The details have to be worked out to come here for two or three weeks for a very intensive session at the beginning of the term to study the, uh, uh, campaigning practices, etcetera, etcetera, then for the students to be able to go out into the field for six weeks until election Day as practical experience campaigning in their home communities or here in Monroe County work for the candidate of their choice on to get political signs credit for this and then to continue their education the second half of the term. We're gonna have a response from Chancellor Carter on Mr Levy's question on the yield plan. I don't have any objection to the Yale plan of the faculty of a division will adopt it. Look, now, let let me add one other thing on Let me add one of the thing on the live speaker. It used to be that the political science department then known his government. I made arrangements of the kind that are being proposed here. Uh, I concern. Remember, in the campaigns of 1952 and in 1956 that was available, I do want to add one little thing about Princeton because I think everybody is now getting excited and pleased with them. I think what Princeton has done is to take two of its reading weeks and move them up in front and is not changing its class contact hours. Uh, what, before the next question, will you pass the motorcycle helmets up? People can't ride around the state without him. They'll get busted content. The answer is they can providing that they don't. In a veil of those students that wanna go here, I have a question of the gentleman in the wings. I'm sorry they're here. I'm sorry. Now, as I've said many times, that, you know is more important to help somebody. Then it makes the money. And of all his in case is going to his neighbour You to make some money and not help anyone that something's wrong. So, brother, I'm saying right on with what you're saying. If you could come down to us sitting in here, you know, sitting in the class is reading books about Jab. It happened in 14. 40 people are dying in 14 40 1970. If we could do something about it, I'm gonna be out there doing something. B, Two more questions and I recognized first a gentleman in the wings. No. All right, All right. I'd like to ask a moral question for to the structure of this university. A few people in the audience have been directing moral questions to the speakers and have been getting practical, rational, legalistic and government distinct type answers back. The man here asked the most obvious, pertinent question. What are these people going to do to help us? The 9,000 of us that voted to strike and I'd like an answer to that. Oh, is anyone choose to answer that? I don't know, really, What more we can say. We will protect your right in the same way will protect your right to strike. We have said that were sympathetic to the idea of trying to work out no academic penalty. I think what we're doing is we're going over the same damn tape, sir, Who has Who has the power? Who has the power two counterbalance the professors that are cutting our grades because they intimidate us in class because we don't believe in the right And I had a I had a great cut, a whole letter because I disagreed with the professor, you know, which is his right eye, wasn't intimidating him. And I'm not intimidating you because I don't want to do that. And I don't want violence. But what I do want to know is how Who has the authority to say that the professors that won't let us take it past failing won't give us a credit, Not because of who we are, but but what for what we believe in. They just disagree with us who has got the authority to force them to let us have our rights. The 9,000 We want to know power. I suppose the interesting they on this and you're not gonna like it is Nobody has the power. What about the bed of trustees? If we can prove that those individual professors are being prejudiced against us because of our you can if you can begin to show proof of prejudice against you by instructors Yes. You confined mechanisms. Usually Usually you can start through departmental chairmen are deans who are not themes. I've intervened Often plays I want I have one more question. People who are standing up there complaining they haven't been recognized in the back. Yes. Oh, way in the back against right. Smart. Only an academic officer. Well, no, it it Hi. This is generally defined to mean Anak Atomic Vice President or chancellor. May I use safety? Division is not authorized. Well, then somebody authorized Yes. Somebody really authorized that. I did. I have a statement to make while we're here in this meeting. Whatever it is, uh, there's someone downtown in the courtroom now being arraigned in court for, ah, a charge of excessive noise in the fact that a lot of you people heard the p A system going today. Well, we were running this and I was in the backseat speaking in it, and Gary Vote was driving, and we were stopped by no less than forest police cars who started to search the car. They wouldn't ask us. Well, one answer a straight question as to what was wrong. They just ignored us, attempted to search the car to find anything they could to stop the announcement of this rally tonight. I want you to know that. And now they arrested Gary and he's downtown in court. Uh, why? I have two questions. Make them quick, please. He's not. I have two questions, though. One Why? Why? Why do we have to get stopped by forced a policeman on a trumped up charge, obviously. And, uh, to, uh, where were the campus police? Why? Why? Why went that? What were the Stapley? Why were four cars out there? No, I don't find out about the health center. I know nothing about it. I did not call any state police. Ladies, the ladies and gentlemen way have exceeded even the increased time that I thought was just I thank you. I thank you for your attention. I hope that we have lot dig, dig. They might put up. We go. Okay. Wait. Hey! And so in a tumult, this afternoon's program draws to a rather shattering conclusion. The mikes have been cut on stage and students are still attempting to speak to the crowd assembled this 4,000 plus crowd with reportedly another few 1,000 outside of the beginning, facilities were made available so that those could view a television report of this in other parts of the campus. Speaking on this evening's this afternoon's program, Harry Predator, a professor of law and Dale pride well and sort of