REPORTER: --the 17th. This morning, demonstrators blocked access to the Bryan Administration Building. And after that, picket lines were established around Ballantine and Rawles Halls. Five students met with a group of administrators this morning and agreed to maintain open picket lines, permitting these students, who desire to attend classes, at least access until this meeting took place. Now, coming onto the podium, or onto the stage, we see President Sutton, Chancellor Carter, and the moderator of this afternoon's meeting, Professor of Law Harry Pratter.  Also seated on the stage is student body president Keith Parker. HARRY PRATTER: Ladies and gentlemen, my name is Harry Pratter. I'm just a poor professor of law.  And I hope to be able to be, literally, a moderator for this meeting. I've been on the campus at Bryan Hall since 7:30 in the morning. I know there are deep divisions among us. Quite frequently, during the day, when students were asked what their plans were and students were asked what's likely to happen, I heard one response. That response was it is up to the individual conscience of the person. It is up to his moral conscience. That explanation is appealing to me. I consider the moral conscience to be the most legitimate source of values and actions. And because I heard that phrase, because I am committed to it, I, too, want to appeal to your moral conscience. I ask that, even though there are divisions among us-- I understand that feelings are lacerated. I understand we are living in a tense world. I understand some of the ugliness that's occurred on campuses and in the rest of the world. And I also understand that there is hope for the world-- that there are occasions when certain differences must be set aside. If there is any chance of agreement of understanding of building a better world, we must not lose those aspects of civilization we have gained for so long. This society is sick in very many ways. But it is not incurable. And we are gathered together today to make one manifestation of rationality. We can learn. We can talk. We can discuss. We can exchange. We can-- we'll be better for it. Well, your leader used the word \"love\" at Dunn meadows. We use the word \"peace.\" We use the word \"people.\" And I ask you to remember those words. I ask you to convert this an occasion that we can all be proud of. First, then, will be a statement by President Sutton, then a statement by Chancellor Carter. Then, I understand, the student leaders will make statements. Then, I hope to be able to recognize people from the floor. You recognize, no matter how fair I want to be, no matter how much I will want to recognize people of different views, how difficult this will be for me. In a sense, we must discipline ourselves in this audience. I should also announce that it's the kind of meeting that we must have a time limit. It will be-- there are issues which I don't think can be-- can-- talked over and over again. I hope that, in the hour allotted, an hour from the first speaker, we will be able to clarify enough. Let us see what happens in the hour. Let us agree, at the first, that we will last-- talk-- last for an hour. KEITH PARKER: I think something has to be understood right now-- that this meeting is for the benefit of the students. And I feel that for students to get as much out of this, the moderator should be a student.  And we can supply a student from the law school to moderate, so the law school will still be in moderation.   REPORTER: That was Keith Parker, making a move that indicated that he wanted a student to moderate this afternoon's meeting. There's now a discussion taking place on the stage, trying to decide-- HARRY PRATTER: Mr. Pryweller is a student of mine. I am his teacher.  We got along very well. And I think he got-- I think he got a B plus, which is one of--  --which is one of the highest grades I've ever given.  I have no doubts about-- in commercial law, one of the dullest subjects ever taught.  And if-- if we could get along in that, we can get along in moderating. And we will share these duties. We will be in constant consultation, and we will--  REPORTER: So a student, Dale Pryweller, a student of law, will be sort of co-hosting the activities. HARRY PRATTER: We will fortify each other. And he will fortify me even more than I him.  SPEAKER: Bullshit.  DALE PRYWELLER: OK. Hey. OK. We're gonna-- this is the format we're going to follow. I've got one announcement to make. And we're going to hear short statements from President Sutton and Chancellor Carter, and then Keith and Michael will make short statements. And then we're going to have a question and answer period. Now, my announcement concerns what happened this morning. There were eight people that were arrested outside Bryan Hall. And they were all charged with a misdemeanor, disorderly conduct, except for one, who is also charged with disregarding a police signal. Now, bond-- bond has been set at $50. We need $400 at least for bond. And we need more than that for our defense. Now, we've got one of the law professors starting on the case. And he's handled it so far, Professor [? Shornhorse. ?] He's handled a lot of student problems. He deserves around of applause.  So those of you who were asked a little bit earlier if you have motorcycle helmets, will you either pass them around yourselves? Or will you given to nearby marshals, who have white shirts and green bands and the moral force of marshals, of course? And while this whole thing is going on, we're going to try and raise some money and get those kids out of jail and back here with us. They weren't arrested fairly anyway.  Yeah. Keith says, not nickels and dimes. We need some money. All the money is going to go to the Student Government Defense Fund. We're going to use it for bail and defenses for stuff that happens around here on campus. OK. President Sutton, do you want to start? JOSEPH SUTTON: Yes. First, I wish to address myself to, eh, a statement attributed to me in, eh, various ways in the-- in various newspapers. Can you hear me? AUDIENCE: No. JOSEPH SUTTON: Oh, sorry-- attributed to me in various newspapers. And none of these newspapers' quotations seem to agree among themselves. This has to do with a speech which I gave in Evansville, Indiana. Now, if you won't-- if you won't think that I'm, I'm indulging you or anything, I will tell you, uh, what happened briefly, and then tell you what, uh, I actually said in this connection. I went to Evansville, Indiana, to address an alumni group to talk about educational problems that I foresee in the year 2000. When I arrived-- well, I mean, just bear with me, please. And-- and then you can hiss me when I'm finished. Uh, well, hiss me now if you like, but--   When I arrived, I found that there was apprehension in, among a significant number of people attending that meeting about what was going on in Bloomington. The question usually gets put to me, what the hell is going on in Bloomington? And so I addressed myself to that, pointing out that what the hell was going on in Bloomington-- and I'm summarizing here-- had, A, been peaceful; B, had been the result of the concern of not only, uh, young people who are considered to be on the left, if there is such a thing, but young people clear across the spectrum of political opinion. And the thing that concerned them was the war. And they were making a moral and peaceful protest to indicate their concern and, in many cases, their disdain for what was happening in Vietnam. I told them that they had every reason to be proud of the students and the entire academic community of Indiana University. This was followed-- this is a summary. And, and I-- since I was giving it extemporaneously, I don't have any notes. Uh, there was a question and answer period, uh, following this. Oh, I should also add that I stated that it was the policy agreed upon by the administration that the university would remain open for those students who wished to attend, that those students who did not wish to attend and who felt some moral obligation to go out and do something else-- be it demonstrate or go back to their hometowns and talk to their elected representatives or their friends and neighbors and so on-- ah, were free to do so, ah, and that, uh, eh, then there was-- this was followed by a question and answer period. The question that elicited the unfortunate and conflicting quotations was the question would you, under any circumstances, close the university? And my answer to that was not that, ah, after-- I-- I can't remember all the adjectives-- bloody mayhem, death, and destruction, et cetera, had occurred, but that I would certainly close the university, on my own initiative, if I felt that the lives of students, faculty, or citizens were endangered by any activity, or if there were threats or possibilities of grave damage to property. Now, that is what I said. And I want to get that cleared up. It was reported in one paper-- I won't get into that. There were conflicting reports about what I said. But that is, in fact, uh, not verbatim, because I don't remember the verbatim statement. But that is what I said. Now, let me get on to the second part of my statement, because I know that you will have a lot of questions that you will wish to raise with both myself and Chancellor Carter. I feel that my obligation, and indeed, responsibility is to provide an educational opportunity, eh, in the classroom for those students who wish such an opportunity. Uh, I do not feel, therefore, that I can close the university, because these students who wish to attend classes-- and there are many thousands-- have paid their fees, and have every right to expect that, what they paid for, they will get. It's their bag. It's what they want to do. It's what the institution was originally set up to do. And that's my obligation. On the other--  On the other hand, I do not feel that those students who, out of reasons of conscience, wish to go out and do something else, providing it is, does not interfere with the rights of others to do their thing, should, in any way, be interfered with. And so long as they do not interfere with the rights of others to do their thing, I feel it is the o-- as much the obligation of the university to protect those who are doing something else as it is to protect those who attend class.  BYRUM CARTER: . DALE PRYWELLER: Chancellor Carter. BYRUM CARTER: I'll try to keep my-- uh, can you hear me? AUDIENCE: Yes. BYRUM CARTER: I'll try to keep my comments relatively brief, because they relate largely to a question of attitude relating to the, to initially, the student government demands, which were made of the president sometime back on May 1, and then followed by a referendum run by the students on this item, which also went to faculty members and to staff. There were a set of demands here, and I want to speak to them very briefly. The first demand presented was that the university repudiate President Nixon's plans for Southeast Asia and demand the immediate withdrawal--   REPORTER: The crowd has risen to its feet as Chancellor Carter read that one demand from the referendum, and en masse, let out a cheer. BYRUM CARTER: It's obvious what your sentiment is.  Now, these demands were presented to the president of the university. I am going to speak first as a faculty member, not as a chancellor. Had the president of this university made a statement in behalf of this university stating this kind of repudiation, I would have moved a censure. And I would have moved it for a damn simple reason. He's appointed as president to preside over the educational policy and direction of this institution, not to make statements for those of us on the faculty or among the students with relation to foreign policy. I think--  I happen to personally hold that view of the faculty as well. The faculty is a corporate body concerned with scholarship and learning. Its function is different. It has a large-- it has a large number of alternatives open for protest or demonstration at all kinds of matters which relate to political activities, but not as a corporate body. Number two was to end the campus complicity in Southeast Asia and open the books of the IU Foundation to supply information on government contracts.  BYRUM CARTER: The books of the IU Foundations on government contracts have been open for years.  It is very simple to get access to the records on government contracts of this university. One, there are published lists which come out periodically identifying the contract. Secondly, it is possible to examine the contract in the office of Dean Merritt. The only thing that is withheld on the statement of the contracts is those sections of the budget which relate to the individual salaries of investigators. This has been the case here for years. And year after year, we have had to repeat the same message. The books on government contracts are open. Number three, with relation to the financial commitment to the Bobby Seale Defense Fund, it is a simple thing to answer.  Individual students, faculty, and others can make contributions to this Defense Fund. It is illegal to take general fund money and make contributions of this kind. I personally don't want to go to Michigan City right now.  Number four dealt with bringing-- increasing the percentage of black students in the university in accordance with the percentage of the black people in the state of Indiana.  I am-- I'm shocked that you applaud. Why not more? The blunt truth of the matter--  The blunt truth of the matter is that we have been working on increasing the number of black students in this university. Vice Chancellor Herman Hudson and I are now to prepare a plan to try to further increase the number of black students. I think there is a mythology here that you want to set quotas. You don't want to set quotas. You want to take people in and educate them. And you want to increase numbers. We know that we have a smaller proportionate number of black students now than we had in the 1950s. Our intention is to do something about it. And we've been meeting with the black student leaders on it. AUDIENCE:  DALE PRYWELLER: Let's let him finish up what he has to say, please. BYRUM CARTER: We have met with the black student leaders on it. And we are working constructively at it. The other thing that ended on the referendum was to close the university. The student vote was 9,000 plus to 7,000 plus yes.  The faculty vote was three quarters plus no. The blunt truth of the matter is, however, why should the rights of those who wish to go on be turned off by the fact of the majority rule? I am not--  DALE PRYWELLER: Come on. Can we have a little quiet, please? BYRUM CARTER: Now, President Sutton has spoken before of our concern that those who really wish to withdraw from the classes and do other things of a constructive nature in relation to making their political positions known, that we are concerned to protect their rights. I am quite willing to say that I will, I find the faculty council resolution passed yesterday urging the faculty to pay particular attention to this and to take steps when they can to provide that academic penalties are not felt by the students. There is, however, a myth in this system which I find startling-- that administrators can issue orders to faculty about this. They can't, and they never have been able to. DALE PRYWELLER: Um, . Um, before Keith and Mike speak, I'd like to do one other thing. I lied. I'd like to read you the names of those people who were arrested, and tell you that, if any of you know anything-- if you were a witness, if you were there, if you know these people, you saw something-- go to the student government office and write down on a piece of paper who you are, where we can get in touch with you, what you were doing while you were there, names, anything you can remember. While I'm reading the names, I'd like to invite President Sutton, Chancellor Carter, and Mr. Pratter to contribute to our fund.  Those-- those people arrested--   REPORTER: Currently, President Sutton and Chancellor Carter have refused that invitation. DALE PRYWELLER: Those-- those people arrested were William Curley, Paul Dobbs, Susan Young, Gregory Hess, Steve Emery, Roger [? Nalton, ?] Mike Jones, and John Cowles. I hope we can all give them our moral and any kind of support you can give them.  OK. Our next speaker is Vice President of of the Student Body, Mike King.  MIKE KING: Forgive me if I-- if this takes a little time. There's-- there's quite a bit of a correction in addition to the minutes to be made. Um, I want to talk first about President Sutton's statement. Um,  said, uh, as near as I can figure is, is true, although the tone of his statement was a little different when it was read yesterday. Um, and there's some, some things that he did leave out that I think people should know. Um, and we have contacted the Evansville press. And, uh, they have told us that, uh, he can deny it all he wants, but it's our word against his. Um, this is, this is from the Evansville press, a reporter, uh, willing to testify to these notes that she took, exact quote here. He told the alumni that IU will remain open unless, and I quote, great violence causing bodily harm or possible death and grievous property damages forces me to close it. But it will be bloody mayhem before I will close it. And if I close it, I will close it good and proper. And this is something left out here. Salaries will cease and things will come to a standstill. And it will stay closed till I'm good and ready to open it. I wasn't appointed president of the university to deny anybody the right to an education, no matter how reasonable or how short a strike request is, is sought. I will not permit it. Now, it's not-- it's not only students that were a little upset about this statement. Faculty were a little upset that, uh, there's so many first person pronouns here. Um--  But I think some of the other things that were mentioned here, uh, during his talk are a little instructive. This is from the Evansville Courier now under a headline, \"IU President Determined to Keep His School Open.\" Um, although there are a couple of students in the IU student government whom Sutton admittedly doesn't like, he said the leaders so far have asked students to obey rules and avoid violence. I can't believe it. It may not last. But it has up till-- up until now. He said, the IU students generally don't like the present student government, whose leader calls himself a self-styled Black Panther militant.  Um, and it goes on, talking about how, uh, students ran Mark  off campus. And then, here's another section. It's-- it's kind of useful, in view of the people who were arrested today. Uh, he believes there are about-- and this was also in the . People can check on this too. And-- and, uh, you can check with the reporters. Um, he believes that there are about 50 students on the IU campus dedicated to violent destructive acts--  --who may be able to raise 200 to 400 more for additional support. The rest are fine young men and women who are concerned about the war and other problems. Now, I want to point out that whoever those 50 students are dedicated to violent destructive acts, that they're not uniformed, that they do not carry four foot clubs. They are not dressed up in riot gear, that they do not have--  --that they do not have two half tracks poised on the edge of town, as was done last week, uh, by state police. Uh, and if any vi-- violence comes to this campus, that's where it's going to come from, those police.  Um, he said he has heard talk that some ou-- some of the out of town students believe, uh, believe if IU stays open, it will break the national strike. Sutton said, there is no way of telling who are the out of town students. Luckily, Bloomington is a small town, and cannot accommodate many out of town people, he said.  Now, now, before I lean into this next part, I want to emphasize, um, um, that in two meetings that Keith and I had with the president, and, and, uh, as, as, you heard him say again today, uh, that he would n-- not make a statement on foreign policy, and at this time, not even as an individual, because, because he knew--  --he knew, he knew that his name could not be dissociated from the fact that he was president of Indiana University. Now, he made that statement to Keith and I, uh, twice. And, and he's been making it repeatedly. Uh, this is what occurred, uh, at the Evansville alumni meeting, according to the Evansville Courier. Students have asked him to denounce the move into Cambodia. But Sutton, who lived in Thailand for three years as a special advisor to the government, said, quote, I don't even have the facts yet. I'm a professional in this field, and I cannot make a decision without the facts, end quote. And then, and then the final statement of, uh, the article, which is not a direct quote-- and we're trying to run down a direct quote. He said, however, that he personally favors the move himself, although he would not make such a statement as the IU president, this after promising that he would never make such a statement. So that it is not a question here of a apolitical university versus politics invading the university. It is a question of Mr. Sutton's politics versus the politics of the people of university.  Finally, I want to say that, uh, in view of the statement that Keith and I released yesterday, that this meeting, uh, [? is ?] the responsibility of many other concerned student. I was, I was home preparing for a class when I found out that, uh, friends of mine had been arrested. Uh, I, I, I want to say that-- I want-- I was, I was proud of those students taking a stand. I was proud of the faculty taking a stand out there. And I think it's about time the rest of university takes a stand.  DALE PRYWELLER: OK. I'm gonna give it back to Sutton and Carter after you speak. . HARRY PRATTER: My co-moderator and I agree that President Sutton should have an opportunity to respond before Mr. Parker makes his remarks.  AUDIENCE: No!  JOSEPH SUTTON: I did not say I-- I, I made no-- sorry. I made no comment, pro or con, on the present campaign in Cambodia. AUDIENCE: . DALE PRYWELLER: Uh, we're going to get to questions in a second. Uh, we have one more speaker, a man whose conduct has, has been exemplary in the past weekend. Uh, the--  President of your student body, Keith Parker.  REPORTER: The audience is once again rising to its feet in a greeting to Keith Parker, who has been sitting quietly at the edge of the table set up on stage.  Now, the president of the student body, Keith Parker. KEITH PARKER: All I can say to that is right on. AUDIENCE: Right on. KEITH PARKER: Uh, what I have to say will not take much time, because I think, uh, Mike has said, uh, enough. And I've said enough in the past. And I think now, many of you have things to say that are closer, you know, to what needs to be said, and are very important also. But I'd like to speak first to, uh, one part of the demands, the demand on Bobby Seale-- that we never said money would be taken out of the general fund, you know, to implement this. We said that means would be made to raise money. Now, the people of Indiana, no matter how beautiful they may be, are not yet at the point where they can relate to chipping into Bobby Seale's Defense Fund. Now-- so this is why we-- we understood this clearly from the start, and had in our heads that'd be means to raise money. Now, in terms of the statement that Mike and I made yesterday-- and I said, you know, I said that, uh, well, if Mike and I have to be policemen, then we might as well move into Bryan Hall. What I was speaking in terms of was that I think-- and I've said this enough times-- that if Mike and I are going to have to do all these jobs on campus, that our offices might as well be in the president's office in Bryan 200. AUDIENCE: Right on. KEITH PARKER: --and if-- AUDIENCE: Right on.  And I'll say it again. And if those offices were up for election, Mike and I would run for those too.  So the purpose, the purpose of people being here today is to once run what is on their minds directly to those people who should have some answers. And everyone has to understand this. Everyone has to understand that you do have a right to speak out, that no one can deny you this right. And if the rights of those who want to attend classes are to be protected, then the rights of those who want to speak out must be protected.  So I don't want to take up too much more time. But all I'm gonna say is that I'm still on strike. AUDIENCE: Right on. Right on.  KEITH PARKER: And to those beautiful people at Bryan and at Ballantine and all around today, all power to the people.  REPORTER: You're listening to live coverage of the student administration forum. We now pause 10 seconds for station identification. DALE PRYWELLER: We'll-- we'll get questions from the floor. And uh, are the, are the floor microphones on? Do they have enough lead to carry them back to people who, uh, want to speak? REPORTER: We no questions being accepted from the floor. HARRY PRATTER: If you can't get to a microphone and shout loud enough for us up here to hear, we can repeat your question. AUDIENCE: Can I be recognized, please?   I'd like to speak for the students that want an education.  HARRY PRATTER: You will have your chance. DALE PRYWELLER: OK. Um, principally, this was to be a question and answer session for President Sutton and Chancellor Carter. So if we could keep to that, uh, everybody here would appreciate it. I know they would. Right in the front in the middle.  Yell your question while we-- AUDIENCE: My, my question is to the people who are leading the strike. . My question is to the people who are leading the strike. With all this glorious rhetoric about respecting people's rights, I'm wondering, seriously, what action is to be taken by the student government, that is obviously leading the strike, to stop people from pushing people, which is assault and battery, I understand, pushing people, pushing bricks at people, and closing doors. Now, this is a violation of rights. And I'd like to know what's going to be done.  DALE PRYWELLER: OK, Mike. MIKE KING: Yeah, as far as the strike today goes, you'll have to talk to people that were running the strike, that were on strike lines. I was not at-- student government was not .  But I want to say-- I want to say a little bit about, uh--  I want to say that, uh, I was picketing on Friday. And, uh, I was pushed around and shoved around and assaulted around, as, as, you know, these, these, uh, uh, as, as much as, uh, scabs were, uh, by scabs going through the line.  I think-- I think that, you know-- AUDIENCE: . DALE PRYWELLER: Can we give her the microphone and let her, um-- she-- she wants, she wants to sharpen the question. AUDIENCE: .  AUDIENCE: All right. Now, I want an answer to this question. You are demanding that the administration give answers. You're demanding that the administration give action. Now, I'd like some action that prevents my not going to class.  Now, I'd like to hold this mic and represent the people who have not been heard from until I get an answer for action.   AUDIENCE: What about the people dying? AUDIENCE: Let's keep on this issue, all right? We'll raise one at a time.  KEITH PARKER: As we clearly said, picket lines are picket lines. They'll be defined by the picketers. We do not have individual strings on every picketer. We made it clear-- we made it clear that they would de-- be defined by such. Now, we call for open picket lines. Now, if people decide that they believe strong enough to close those lines, it is their choice. And that's all I gotta say. AUDIENCE:  my rights--  DALE PRYWELLER: Um-- HARRY PRATTER:  Chancellor Carter wants to respond to that. DALE PRYWELLER: Chancellor Carter will respond. BYRUM CARTER: May I simply say that I'm in full agreement with you, and that I hope if you have these difficulties--  DALE PRYWELLER: I don't think they can hear you. BYRUM CARTER: You will let us know-- that the truth of the matter is, I do not see how, in the name of X against repression, you repress people. And it seems to me that this has happened on some of the closed picket lines.  DALE PRYWELLER: In the-- in the yellow shirt. Behind you. HARRY PRATTER: Behind you. AUDIENCE: I have a question for the, uh, for the president and the chancellor. Now-- DALE PRYWELLER: Can somebody pass him a mic?  HARRY PRATTER: We'll repeat it. Go ahead. BYRUM CARTER: Go ahead. AUDIENCE:  the faculty, as you said, voted three quarters plus in support of President Nixon's Cambodian invasion. BYRUM CARTER: Is that true? JOSEPH SUTTON: No, no, no. HARRY PRATTER: The-- the factual premise is wrong. Do you want to rephrase your question?  AUDIENCE:  voted against invasion? JOSEPH SUTTON: Yes. AUDIENCE: I don't have a question.  HARRY PRATTER: The question has been answered. In the, uh--  This gentleman right there. MAN: Mr. Chairman? OK. HARRY PRATTER: I called on him. You'll be next. You can . AUDIENCE: . I'd like to know exactly  faculty  administrative policy. Are the students who do choose to not attend classes ?   JOSEPH SUTTON: Just so you won't think I'm ducking the issue, I will tell you this. At the last Bloomington council meeting, this-- this policy is decided campus by campus, and we have seven. At the last Bloomington campus meeting, the Bloomington faculty council took action and made a recommendation to the faculty at large. And I will now-- uh, uh, I do not oppose this recommendation. And as a matter of fact, it is quite in accordance with academic tradition, as I have known it. Now, Chancellor Carter will give you the details if you would allow him to do so. BYRUM CARTER: Uh, quickly, what was passed was a resolution which essentially urged that faculty pay serious attention to finding means by which students would not suffer undue academic penalties for participation in political protest, for going back home, and so forth, to talk to people. The options on this are not spelled out in the faculty council resolution, because the various divisions of the Bloomington campus have different kinds of rule patterns on parts of their grades. The College of Arts and Sciences Policy Committee, as I understand, already made some suggestions-- DALE PRYWELLER: Yeah, I know who he is. BYRUM CARTER: --connecting with this. The law school faculty was prepared to meet on this today. I think the business school faculty is about to meet. And there are various alternatives. But I think you may get different things developed in different places. Obviously, the incomplete is one, with a deferred examination. That might be a possibility. It's easy to do for an instructor. Some pass-fail relationships may be done. Uh, as I say, there are various options that are open. But it is up to the individual faculty member to accept the recommendations which come to him, because grading practices around here have always stayed with the individual faculty member. DALE PRYWELLER: Uh, Chuck Turner was next. CHUCK TURNER: Yes, I'd like-- I-- I have, uh, at least two questions I'd like to ask. And the first one has to do with nonviolence. We've heard a great deal about non-- nonviolence on this campus. And I'd like to know who is responsible for calling police onto this campus.   We-- we have-- we have it from Mayor Hooker that someone in the administration invited police onto this campus. Is that true? JOSEPH SUTTON: No matter who called the police on this campus-- wait a minute.  I am ultimately responsible. AUDIENCE: Well, who did it?  JOSEPH SUTTON: Because I'm president of Indiana University. CHUCK TURNER: Sir-- DALE PRYWELLER: Hey, can we-- can we let Chuck ask his question? JOSEPH SUTTON: Blame me, I'm saying. Yeah, you can blame me for it. AUDIENCE: Who called them? DALE PRYWELLER: Chuck CHUCK TURNER: There is great sentiment on campus that, uh, much of the responsibility for what violence there w-- was that did occur today had to do with the presence of the police. It's well known that the presence of uniformed officers tend to incite situations. And we'd like to know--  We'd like-- we'd like to have your assurance that, uh, the police will not be called on the campus again-- JOSEPH SUTTON: Well- CHUCK TURNER: --for just this reason. AUDIENCE: . JOSEPH SUTTON: If you will give me assurance that-- I don't care-- you can picket all you want to. But if you prevent people from going about their appointed tasks and do not allow them to do this, and, after I patiently waited for several hours-- and don't think this isn't going to, going to, have some backlash, eh-- you were-- I-- the-- the, uh, picketers were requested to vacate the doorways, and were, I am told, informed that they could go to a form of open picketing.  AUDIENCE: Why are there police here today, right now? JOSEPH SUTTON: To protect the lives, the property of yours and mine.  CHUCK TURNER: My second--  DALE PRYWELLER: Mis-- Mr. Turner still has the mic. CHUCK TURNER: My second question has to do with ROTC. More than a year ago, the arts and science-- there was a committee of the Division of Arts and Sciences, which was composed of faculty and students, as I understand, which turned a report in which favored the position that no credit should be given for ROTC work. At that time--  At that time, an all-university counc-- committee was appointed, as I understand by, by yourself. DALE PRYWELLER: Pardon? CHUCK TURNER: At that time about a year ago, when that report came in-- JOSEPH SUTTON: Yes. CHUCK TURNER: --an all-university committee was appointed. JOSEPH SUTTON: That is correct. CHUCK TURNER: And I have it that that committee has turned in a report to you. All right-- that you have access to the findings of that committee. JOSEPH SUTTON: Which is true. And a, a, uh, that report has gone to the faculty council for its consideration and recommendation. AUDIENCE: What is it? JOSEPH SUTTON: The, uh, recommendation was that-- I don't remember the details. But what you want to know is did they recom-- did they recommend the abolition of ROTC or not? And the answer is they did not. CHUCK TURNER: What about credit for ROTC credit?  BYRUM CARTER: Uh, Mr. Turner, can I speak to one point? Because the arts and science report a year ago did not say no credit for ROTC. What it did was to make a recommendation to the faculty of the College of Arts and Sciences that work in ROTC should not count within that portion of the student's total program that must be taken within the College of Arts and Sciences. It thus placed it in the same category as some of the other courses in professional schools, uh, that it could be taken, but within the maximum allowed by the College of Arts and Sciences to that point. It did not propose any immediate ending of credit. It had some long run proposals about ROTC, uh, which were to be phased over a period of time. It was sent to an all-university committee, because ROTC is relevant not only to the faculty of the college and the students within the college, but to all other students within the various divisions. CHUCK TURNER: I have one last quick question, then I'll release the mic. I'd like to know if all the IU books are open to public, and-- including sources and uses of funds. And if not, why not? BYRUM CARTER: Well, the IU foundation funds, there are some of them-- AUDIENCE:  JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, I'm trying to-- AUDIENCE: Trying to find out the answer. JOSEPH SUTTON: There-- there is, uh, there is a, uh, a public accounting of all university use of funds made to the state of Indiana. And those become public documents, and therefore, are open. CHUCK TURNER: What about the foundation ? DALE PRYWELLER: I recognize the gentleman on the stage here. AUDIENCE: What about  foundation? AUDIENCE:  the foundation? JOSEPH SUTTON: The foundation is honored annually by a firm from outside the institution. And the report of that audit is available in the foundation office. AUDIENCE: . AUDIENCE: People, I'm representing Veterans for Peace and certain students at the law school. The-- these are not ordinary times. This has not been an ordinary week. And I don't think that ordinary responses from the administration are appropriate.  I think that the situation which Indiana University finds itself in today demands an extraordinary response.  I may turn some of you off but I want to say very clearly that I do not support closed picket lines. But, if those lines were not closed this morning, we would not be here today.  REPORTER: Once again, the audience is rising to its feet, showing its solidarity, at least on this point, the emphasis being that student demands are only met by confrontation. AUDIENCE: Now, I don't know how many of you read The Daily Student this morning, but I had a long essay in, which was, which was titled at the top, \"Don't Shut Down the University.\" If any of you-- please. If any of you read further than the title, you would see that the important part of that recommendation of that essay was the recommendation, not the title. My recommendation was basically the Yale plan, which I'll-- let me explain in just a second. It was given to Chancellor Carter, a personal copy yesterday, and to Dean Harvey, a personal copy yesterday. And all of you who read The Student this morning had an opportunity to see it. I do not believe, because of my deep ingrained, civil libertarian principles, having lived in the south for many years, I do not believe in unbridled majority rule. I do believe in preservation of the rights of the minority. And therefore, I don't think that the university should be closed down for everyone.  I think that it should-- it should continue in existence, business as usual, for those who want it that way.  Wait'll-- wait'll I finish. But just saying, as the administration has made a pass at so far, that they-- that they will attempt to protect the rights of those who don't agree is not enough.  I understand completely that the uni-- that university administration cannot order the faculty to do anything. And I wouldn't have it any other way. But I think they can clearly make their feelings known that they agree with the recommendation to each individual school, to each individual school to handle any way they see fit to allow those of us who want to go out in the community, who want to go to Washington, who want to speak, write, lobby in our own way, or to do-- do more constructive things during the next three weeks than take exams to do so. And it should be a clear recommendation from both the president and the chancellor that their-- that classes will be waived, exams will be waived, and credit will be given automatically.  I do not believe in the productivity of interfering with the rights of those who, sometimes for very sound pragmatic reasons, are here at great personal expense, either to themselves or to others. I think they should be able to continue to go to class and continue to take exams. And-- but I think that the university has an obligation, taken within the broadest possible context of what's been going on in the country in the last 10 days, to see this step as an extraordinary step, perhaps, for this state and this administration, but as a very minor step taken when we consider the alternative. AUDIENCE: Right. AUDIENCE: And I think they have an obligation to say, yes, while I would not ordinarily do so, these are extraordinary times, and I recommend to the-- to the other school leaders that they do-- that they do exactly this.  I would like to say, I have the highest regard for this man from working with him. He spent 12 years in the Air Force, resigned his commission last year, because it was ethically unjustifiable.  And he's president of the student body of the law class. And he's a member with me of the Veterans for Peace. [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] We've got a reply from Chancellor Carter to Mr. Boyle. BYRUM CARTER: Well, can I reply? Again, I thought I-- excuse me. I thought I had already said that in my judgment--  --the recommendation-- AUDIENCE: . [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] Come on. BYRUM CARTER: --that I personally favor the recommendation made by the faculty council yesterday, which went straight in the direction which is indicated, I think, by this last part of the comments. I'm sorry. I haven't received the letter as yet. But I've been a little busy. DALE PRYWELLER: . [? HARRY PRATTER: ?] Just, there's a brief announcement just  make about the students who were arrested. AUDIENCE: I am Chris [? Lohman ?] from the English department, and Tom [? Shornhorse ?] and Shelley [? Geller ?] and Peter Lintenbaum and I just came from the jail. The eight people who were arrested are out. They--  They have been arraigned on, uh, uh, $50 bond-- they've been released on $50 bail apiece. That's $400. The bail money was raised by the faculty. And, uh--  But there is one very important point about this. And it's only because of the crowded conditions that Tom [? Shornhorse ?] isn't talking to you. We didn't all want to march down here. Tom is very concerned-- Tom represents the eight students in court from now on. And Tom is very much concerned that you all know that the judge made a particular effort, and we mean this quite seriously, to set the bonds as low as possible. Uh, they could have been at $500 apiece, with the idea that there is going to be some reciprocation to this from our part-- that, in other words, the implication was quite clear that if anybody's going to be busted tonight, it's not going to be $50. It's going to be $500 apiece. AUDIENCE: . AUDIENCE: We all know that. But all I can say is I don't think we can raise $500 apiece for a number of students from now. So I hope you all keep this in mind. Thank you.  [? KEITH PARKER: ?] Uh, we counted the money back stage. And we were able to collect $446.18.  Now, since those brothers and sisters have been bailed out, I think that it would be beneficial for us to put this into a permanent fund, because uh, this little idea's been running in my head that it's going to be used again. And while I-- I'd like to make one more announcement about the teach in tonight. 7:00 PM right here, you know, in the auditorium-- and the main speakers will be Professor Stan  on containment in Vietnam, Professor Edward Sherman on the American servicemen and Indo-Chinese war, Professor Julius , Vietnam and political dissent; Professor George [? Jergens ?] domestic [? menace ?] of Vietnam--  AUDIENCE:  [? KEITH PARKER: ?] --and Keith Parker, the Black Panthers and political repression. There'll be workshops to follow. And then there'll be a wrap up session in the auditorium after the workshops. HARRY PRATTER: I promised the gentleman who asked the first question that he would be recognized later. And I do so now. AUDIENCE: There's no microphone anywhere near here. HARRY PRATTER: Just keep shouting. We'll repeat your question. AUDIENCE: .  things have come to mind today.  with a family about to graduate next month.  have to work while going to school. Whether you have or not is immaterial. I paid for my education, and I intend to get it. AUDIENCE: People in Vietnam died. AUDIENCE: And there are many people here who would like to get that same education, whether they paid for it, didn't pay for it, or anything else  immaterial. But they want to go to class. I could reference 9,800 and some odd students said that they did not want to go to class for four days. 7,000 some odd said that they did want to go to class. 12,000 abstained. Why?  BYRUM CARTER: Silent majority. [? HARRY PRATTER: ?] Please. Let the speaker finish. BYRUM CARTER:  minority. AUDIENCE: Want to play majority?  12 plus seven makes 19 .  HARRY PRATTER: Please let the speaker finish. AUDIENCE: .   HARRY PRATTER: We-- AUDIENCE: One thing that must be recognized is that every individual student has an individual contract with the university that guarantees, by civil law, .  justification, according to Attorney General  last year . As such, each and every demonstrator  to a court order violation to each and every student.  HARRY PRATTER: Please. AUDIENCE: Now, we all . We all  with what we're here for.  HARRY PRATTER: Please re-- please reach-- please reach the point of your question. AUDIENCE: .  HARRY PRATTER: All right. Just--  The, the, uh, the, the-- just a minute, please. The issue of the rights of those who want to go to class have been raised by several speakers, have been responded to. I don't think that particular statement will, needs more comments. We will now recognize other questions. The gentleman right there. AUDIENCE: I'd like to ask President Sutton-- you mentioned a while ago a possible backlash  going on down here. Are you more concerned, is the administration more concerned with our image or with what the people feel ?  JOSEPH SUTTON: I'm not an expert on what the people feel.  Because I know they feel-- AUDIENCE: . [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] Can we let President Sutton finish the answer, please? JOSEPH SUTTON: Because I know they feel many things. But if your question is to me, do I respect people's feelings and thereby-- oh, let me see how to put that.   No, I am not afraid-- afraid of the backlash.  [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] Ike-- or, let-- with the microphone. AUDIENCE: This, this whole topic keeps coming back up about the vote and what it meant, or the referendum. And I still don't think the question was really answered a moment ago, when, uh, you said there would be recommendations about students who had voted to dissent, or voted to strike. You said there would be recommendations made. And there, at the same time, was the statement by the law professor, who said these are extraordinary times. In view of the fact that they are, and you can guarantee people's rights to go to class, why cannot you guarantee the rights of those people who wish to dissent?  JOSEPH SUTTON: Now, this is really a Bloomington campus matter.  Why, he'll-- he's willing to talk too, but I want to try to answer this as directly as I can answer it, because I was there at the council discussion, and he was not. AUDIENCE: Why? JOSEPH SUTTON: Because it's the Bloomington faculty council, and I preside, and he's not a member.  KEITH PARKER: Um, my-- JOSEPH SUTTON: May I answer that question? I think, basically, what I've tried to get across before is the administration is not authorized to make these decisions by itself. What happened was the council recommended this kind of thing to, to the faculty as a whole. What is happening is that, in division after division, as far as I get reports, they are taking it up. As I said, I think the arts, Arts and Sciences College already has, has tried to deal with this through its elected policy committee. And the law school is meeting. I know the business school is planning to meet. But I can't reach in and tell them what they must do. I can do what I said earlier and express a sentiment of sympathy for the position. But they're going to have to do it. AUDIENCE: Excuse me, but I would like to also ask, in connection with that, is this a democratic institution? AUDIENCE: No. AUDIENCE: And if it is so-called, then how can those two ideas be reconciled? Is it a corporate interest or institution? And do you reconcile corporate interests with democratic ideals and principles? Or are they separate? There was a vote and a recom-- referendum taken here. And the majority of the students voted. That's, that's democratic. I always thought it was.  [? JOSEPH SUTTON: ?] Mr. Pratter wants to speak. HARRY PRATTER: This is a very difficult and profound question that's raised. Democracy is not so simple that its dimensions are self-evident. The question about the majority vote is a question of what belongs on the agenda. Do you want, by majority vote, to strip the people of their constitutional rights? The whole point of a democracy is that it has limits. The whole point of a democracy is there are constitutional protections for certain minorities. I-- as an, as educated people, as people who are attempting to understand our society, we must begin to understand what we mean by democracy in a more complicated way than all questions are resolved.   So there are issues as to what items can be put on the agenda. The answer's along the line of every question has been that we are trying to walk a path. We are trying to develop programs that do protect the rights of the students who have dissented, the rights of the students who feel they're incapable of taking exams. I just came from a law school meeting where we have special constraints on how much we can relieve our students. And we are struggling with this problem. I know that Arts and Science, we can at least agree that we cannot take action when the campus is as seriously split and the student vote by a mere majority vote principle. We can adjust matters in terms of grades and credits, as been suggested, that would do justice to both. That's the point of this meeting. We have made an op-- an impact on how many of the, how many of the students feel strongly that this university cannot merely continue. We have shown. We have done things. And we can do it without creating bitterness in those who perhaps don't feel, at, on these issues, their, their, uh, rights can be compromised by the majority. [? KEITH PARKER: ?] Mr. Pratter, uh--  I would like to, uh, like to ask, you know, as a moderator, you know why you're running all this. Because the moderator should be sitting here, pointing out people to ask questions, and not running all these comments. And then, I have one more-- I have one more question to ask myself. It's in two parts. Although President Sutton has assumed responsibility for, for, uh, asking for the police to come, who was the person that called the police? Who was this person? And second of all, why are we sitting up here on this stage with, uh, various members of that same police force behind us, armed to the gills?  AUDIENCE:  DALE PRYWELLER: Would you want to handle that one?   AUDIENCE:  guts want to waste time, that's what they're doing. JOSEPH SUTTON: Let's say I called them.   HARRY PRATTER: J-- just a minute. Ah, I-- I was carried away. I apologize. I did it in the best interest of trying to reach understanding.  To compensate for, by default, I'll ask my moderator if he wants equal time.  Not-- [? KEITH PARKER: ?] Answer them why there are pigs back there.  [? AUDIENCE: ?] You wanna answer? JOSEPH SUTTON: That question was asked of me once before. Now, let me tell you this. And I know-- I know that you're-- anything I say about this, however reasonable, it seems to me, is going to meet with some kind of hostility response on the part of you automatically.  The Safety Division of Indiana University is trained--  [? KEITH PARKER: ?] Just-- JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, if you don't want to hear the answer, just forget it. But-- are trained and, and instructed to protect the lives-- all right.   DALE PRYWELLER: Hey, let's-- let's let the man finish at least. I mean, you don't have to like what he says. But let him get it out. JOSEPH SUTTON: That's right. I-- I, I know in advance that many of you are not going to like what I say. But they are trained and advised and instructed to be as sensitive and as careful in the protection of your lives as they can be.  AUDIENCE: What have you done? JOSEPH SUTTON: Pardon me? AUDIENCE: The Harvard report! JOSEPH SUTTON: The Harvard report is being implemented as rapidly as it can be implemented. AUDIENCE: Take the guns away from them!  JOSEPH SUTTON: I'll-- now, here again. You wanted to hear it like it is. I do not, at this time, plan to recommend that the guns be removed from the police force.   DALE PRYWELLER: Let's let Ike speak. Ike.  JOSEPH SUTTON: You asked me the question, and I answered it.  AUDIENCE: Um, I'd like to ask a question pertaining to the so-called, quote unquote, neutrality of this university. Um, I'm sure President Sutton is aware, since he was there for three years, of what this unity-- this university does in the Thailand project. And I'd like to throw a few facts out about that. Thailand has not had a free election in 28 years. This university has spent $1.3 million to send people over to Thailand, to train people over in Thailand. Now, as far as the question of ROTC is concerned, if you check out the quotes of military leaders of this country, they say the United States government could not wage war, or whatever they call it, in overseas countries if it wasn't for the ROTC program. 70% of the officers in the United States Army in Vietnam are ROTC graduates. Now, if you people are wrapped up in a civil liberties thing about ROTC, dig it. Right on. But I think the, the civil liberties of the Vietnamese people and the Cambodian people to live without being napalmed on by American imperialists is more important.  [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] This gentleman right here, please.  HARRY PRATTER: Do you want to respond? It's all right. JOSEPH SUTTON: Did you ask me a question about Thailand? AUDIENCE: . JOSEPH SUTTON: All right. I will be glad to answer the question. The contract between the university and Thailand during the period that I was there and subsequent to my return to this country is available. And you may read it. Our prop, pur, purpose there was twofold. One, the School of Education was developing a college of education to train teachers for the children of Thailand throughout the country and open new schools. And that, you can see in the contract. AUDIENCE: . JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, I don't-- it-- if they get educated at a-- I-- well, you. All right, it's propaganda.   DALE PRYWELLER: Please. JOSEPH SUTTON: But I was asked what we were doing. And you-- if you want me to answer, I will complete the answer, and then again, eh, do your own thing. The other, the other part-- all right. AUDIENCE: Keep talking. JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, I'm trying to. [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] You've finished. JOSEPH SUTTON: Uh, the other part of the contract was to train young administrators to go out into the countryside of ha, Thailand. Much, much-- it's almost all rural, almost all agrarian-- and provide better service to-- and these are all civilians-- better service to the peasants and the people of the, of Thailand itself.  HARRY PRATTER: . I recognize the gentleman right in front. JOSEPH SUTTON: Now, I might-- now, let me-- oh, no, I haven't finished the-- I haven't finished the answer, because I want to tell you all I know about it as briefly as I can. How do you-- I mean, was the question a serious one or not? All right. Currently, Indiana University is in a con-- consortium with the University of Wisconsin, the Michigan State University, ah, the University of Minnesota, ah, Indiana-- yes, they're all big 10 schools. Uh, well, I'm-- I can't remember all of them offhand. But they are being financed to help-- these are all professors of economics, statistics, et cetera, agricultural economics, and so forth. This contract is financed by the Ford Foundation for the purposes of developing something known as the National Institute of Development Administration. The, the purpose of that is described by the name. AUDIENCE: What kind of government do they have in Thailand? JOSEPH SUTTON: They have the kind of government, when I was there, that had more school teachers than it had soldiers.  HARRY PRATTER: The gentleman right in front here.  Quiet, please.  AUDIENCE:  come out and answer this man. And last year, during the boycott, [? Snyder ?] came out and told us why we couldn't vote . But you did not come out and meet us until there was violence. You pat us on the back for being peaceful, but you don't say anything until there's violence. Why?  JOSEPH SUTTON: Again, for some of you, this answer will not be satisfactory.  But I will admit that I should have done that, and I didn't do it. AUDIENCE: Why? AUDIENCE: Why? AUDIENCE: Why?  JOSEPH SUTTON: No, I was not afraid. If I was afraid, I'm here-- oh, come on. Knock it off. If-- If you want to just--  I mean, if you want to badger me, uh, we could go out, and come out, badger me. I thought we were trying to get questions answered. And I'm answering the question. I made a mistake. That's all. I am fallible. And I confess to it.  REPORTER: The fallibility that, uh, President Sutton admitted to was that he should have met with students. DALE PRYWELLER: OK-- uh-- REPORTER: --when they-- DALE PRYWELLER: Marty. REPORTER: --asked why he did not. AUDIENCE: I have a-- I have a very brief question for Chancellor Carter. I believe, uh, that this question can also be answered yes or no. And first of all, uh, it's my understanding that, also, besides being chancellor, that you are a faculty member. Is that correct? BYRUM CARTER: I hope so, because that's all I've got tenure as. AUDIENCE: Well, then, would you respond-- would you respond under the understanding that you are responding as a faculty member of this institution, and not as its chancellor to a question? BYRUM CARTER: Depends on the question. AUDIENCE: I'll ask the question. You have heard the Yale plane presented, I believe. Do you understand it? BYRUM CARTER: I'm not sure.  BYRUM CARTER: I've-- if you mean this statement-- AUDIENCE: Yeah. BYRUM CARTER: I've heard it. DALE PRYWELLER: OK. He heard it. BYRUM CARTER: I would like to read it. AUDIENCE: Uh, then my question is-- and I think it can be answered yes or no. As a faculty member of this t, institution, with the understanding that you are not responding as chancellor, but as a faculty member, would you endorse the Yale plan? DALE PRYWELLER: We're going to give Chancellor Carter a few minutes to read it over. BYRUM CARTER: No, yeah. DALE PRYWELLER: It's in the student-- BYRUM CARTER: I tell you, I read .  DALE PRYWELLER: The brown, right in front. AUDIENCE: Yeah. DALE PRYWELLER: If it's not for-- HARRY PRATTER: Ask another question while Chancellor Carter . AUDIENCE: Could I-- yeah. I would, uh-- All right, now, please-- DALE PRYWELLER: Go ahead, man. AUDIENCE: Everybody, all right, everybody in this place is getting a little pissed. But could I have your attention for just a minute, please? All right. Everybody's just a little bit tense. And my Greek blood is running a little hot too. And that doesn't mean I'm in a fraternity. That means my old man came over on the boat. All right?  All right. Now, let's quit throwing the bullshit around, and quit, you know, running around this little bush, because, you know, there's an issue, you see. And this issue comes up. And from this issue come a lot of little issues, you see. And all these people get pissed about these little things. Like, you watch CBS, you know, and you see these construction guys getting all uptight. And some girl up here stands up, and she's getting uptight because she's getting pushed around. But the issue is troops went into Cambodia. The issue is people are being killed right now. That's the issue. We're expanding a war. Now, let's get back to the issue. The issue is not students. That is a diversion. That's to make people in the back pissed at the people up in the front. That's all it is. That's a diversion. That's bullshit. That's politics. Now, let's get down to an issue. Now, there's a lot of pissed people. Now, all right, Mr. Sutton you represent this university. All right. Now, you said this before. OK, there's 9,000 people in this university that are pissed enough to show up to the polls. And that doesn't include your 12,000. 40% of the people United States didn't vote for the president. Big deal.  HARRY PRATTER: You  minutes. AUDIENCE: Now, wait a minute. Let me finish this out. All right. Now, you're responsible. Now, there's 9,000 people that are pissed enough to say we want something done. And then there's some other people that are pissed at us, so they say, you know, oh, well-- excuse me. HARRY PRATTER: Could you to keep that down to a minimum? Or-- AUDIENCE: OK, now, wait a minute. Can I get this question? All right. Now-- all right. HARRY PRATTER: I mean, the figure of speech. AUDIENCE: Right. OK.  Um--  AUDIENCE: Quiet! AUDIENCE: All right. This is for most people that are pissed at me in the back.  Uh, I can shove you in any picket line. HARRY PRATTER: Please, sir. AUDIENCE: I want your help. And now, I want Mr. Sutton's help. And I want your help. What are you going to do with us? There's 9,000 people, if not more. What will you do-- , no we're talking about our lives, mister, because people are going to graduate, and they're going to have to go over to Cambodia. What will you do to help us? HARRY PRATTER: Thank you. AUDIENCE: Will you come to a teach in?   HARRY PRATTER: All right.  Please.  AUDIENCE: . HARRY PRATTER: Please. AUDIENCE: Mr. Sutton. Mr. Sutton, whether you can-- you cannot get away from it. And whether you're president of this university you're not, you're a person. And this thing about, that my job doesn't enable me to feel and to act is a lot of bullshit, man. HARRY PRATTER: It AUDIENCE: That's a lot of bullshit. HARRY PRATTER: We are recognizing-- AUDIENCE: What will you do, as Mr. S-- I'm asking-- HARRY PRATTER: If you recognize people as people, will you give a chance to respond? You've made your point. You, you-- we know you've made your point.  Now, that's it.  AUDIENCE: Say what you feel as a human being. JOSEPH SUTTON: What I feel as a human being is this. And again, I know I'm going to get it.  HARRY PRATTER: Please. JOSEPH SUTTON: I will tell you exactly my individual history of feeling toward the war. In 1958, when I returned from Thailand, I was greatly concerned with what I had seen as an almost unconscious policy commitment to a military build up in Southeast Asia that was going to lead to a major ground war. I made those statements in public and in print. And I made those-- that observation to as many people as I could contact as an assistant professor without tenure at this institution. However, I also felt that no adequate explanation explaining to the American people, A, that this was in the offing, and B, its precise purposes was ever made, nor has it been made, in my judgment. Now, that is not to say-- I don't know. Well, let, let, let me finish my thought here. Um-- HARRY PRATTER: Please. JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, I-- I that's about the size of it, I guess. That's, that's the way I felt. Now--  Now, I-- my views, in 1970, have not changed. One of-- but one of the things--  All right. All right. Have fun. One of the things that bugs me, if you want to know how I feel, is that there is an assumption on the part of a good many people in this country that Asia and Africa and the Near East is a matter of no relevance. They constantly concern themselves primarily with European policy. It is a matter-- it is inevitable, in my judgment, that if we do not build meaningful and peaceful relations between the peoples of Asia and Africa-- all right. Ha, ha, ha. That's funny. Build peaceful relations-- build peaceful relations with these people, that we will eventually be destroyed by our own thoughtlessness. AUDIENCE: Yeah!  JOSEPH SUTTON: But I am not going to take an institutional stand on the Cambodian war.  HARRY PRATTER: Just-- ladies-- all right. Ladies and gentlemen, originally, when we started, I said we would run for an hour. We've already run for-- just a minute. We've already run for an hour and 20 minutes. We'll run till 5:30. And I want to recognize the balcony, the gentleman right over the sign there.  I'm-- I'm sorry I couldn't see you before. Yes. Go. AUDIENCE: I have one question for President Sutton. Why is  legitimate  dissent, i.e., campaigning for your congressman? How would you feel about implementing  to go home for two weeks in the fall before the election ?  JOSEPH SUTTON: If this was me-- if it-- ah, the question was, Princeton allows people to go home two weeks before the campaign to help campaign for their congressman. Is that not correct? I had-- I would have no objection to that policy whatsoever.  If if-- if it, if it were recommended, and by the faculty who control the curriculum and the courses, then I would do it. Now, don't shake your head, because that's the essence of the university.  But I would I have no objection to it. And, and, uh-- that's, that's my answer. HARRY PRATTER: As a member of the faculty council, I think there there's a very good chance that this issue-- I have discussed this issue with other people. And I think there is a great deal of support. This is not-- this is more important than the immediate issue. If we're going to enfranchise the students, if we're going to reduce the voting age to 18, if we're going to recognize that they're away from their communities and cannot legitimately participate, this is the best thing that's come along in education since going home to harvest the crops.  AUDIENCE: I would like to tell you that yesterday, at the faculty action committee, I made a proposal which may help to answer the question that was raised. It wasn't addressed to me. I'm not Predi-- President Sutton. Um, the proposal I made was to, uh, suggest to the political science department that they offer a course which would make it possible for students, say, to come here-- the details have to be worked out-- to come here for two or three weeks for a very intensive session at the beginning of the term to study the uh, uh, campaigning practices, et cetera, et cetera, then, for the students to be able to go out into the field for six weeks until election day as a practical experience campaigning in their home communities, or here in Monroe County, work for the candidate of their choice, and to get political science credit for this, and then to continue their education the second half of the term.  HARRY PRATTER: We're-- we're going to have a response from Chancellor Carter on Mr. Levy's question on the Yale plan.  BYRUM CARTER: I don't have any objection to the Yale plan if the faculty of a division will adopt it. It looks fine.  Now, let-- let me add one other thing on-- let me add one other thing on the last speaker. Uh, it used to be that the political science department, then known as government, made arrangements of the kind that are being proposed here. Uh, I can certainly remember in the campaigns of 1952 and in 1956, that was available. I do want to add one little thing about Princeton, because I think everybody is now getting excited and pleased with them. I think what Princeton has done is to take two of its reading weeks and move them up in front. And it is not changing its class contact hours. [? DALE PRYWELLER: ?] Uh, wh-- before the next question, will you pass the motorcycle helmets up? People can't ride around the state without them. They'll get busted. [? And ?] [? the ?] [? contents. ?] AUDIENCE:  Now, if people can't miss class, miss a lecture, and go on strike, . I would like to ask both of you, what value is that education if you can't-- AUDIENCE: Right on. AUDIENCE: Right on.  JOSEPH SUTTON: The answer is they can--  Pr-- providing that they don't interfere with those students that want to go.  All right. I have a question of the gentleman in the, uh, wings.  I'm sorry. That was addressed to Mr. Parker. I'm sorry. KEITH PARKER: Now, as I've said many times, that, you know, it's more important to help somebody than to make some money. And if all this education's going to do is enable you to make some money and not help anyone, then something's wrong. So brother, I'm saying right on to what you're saying. If you-- if you come down to sitting in here, you know, sitting in these classes, reading books about jive that happened in 1440, and people are dying in 1970, if we can do something about it, I'm gonna be out there doing something. AUDIENCE: Right on.  HARRY PRATTER: There'll be two more questions. And I recognize, first, the gentleman in the wings. AUDIENCE: What about the people in the auditorium that have been standing back here? . HARRY PRATTER: All right. All right. AUDIENCE: I'd like to ask a moral question for, to the structure of this university. A few people in the audience have been directing moral questions to the speakers and have been getting practical, rational, legalistic, and governmentistic type answers back. The man here asked the most obvious, pertinent question. What are these people going to do to help us, the 9,000 of us that voted to strike? And I'd like a answer to that.  HARRY PRATTER: Is there anyone to choose to answer that? BYRUM CARTER: I don't know really what more we can say. We will protect your right to dissent. We will protect your right to strike. We have said that we are sympathetic to the idea of trying to work out no academic penalty. I think what we're doing is we're going over the same damn tape. AUDIENCE: Sir, who has, who has the power? Who has the power to counterbalance the professors that are cutting our grades because they intimidate us in class because we don't believe in the war? And I had a grade cut a whole letter because I disagreed with a professor, you know, which is his right. I wasn't intimidating him. And I'm not intimidating you, because I don't want to do that. And I don't want violence. But what I do want to know is how, who has the authority to say that the professors that won't let us take it pass-fail and won't give us the credit-- not because of who we are but, but what, for what we believe in, they just disagree with us. Who has got the authority to force them to let us have our rights, the 9,000? We want to know that. Who has the power?  JOSEPH SUTTON: I suppose the interesting thing on this-- and you're not going to like it is-- nobody has the power.  AUDIENCE: What, what about the board of trustees? If we can prove that those individual professors are being prejudiced against us because of our political views-- JOSEPH SUTTON: Oh. If you can begin to show proof of prejudice against you by instructors, yes, you can find mechanisms. Usually-- usually, you can start through departmental chairmen or deans, who are not [? fiends. ?] I've intervened often.  HARRY PRATTER: Please. I want-- I have one more question-- people who are standing up, they are complaining they haven't been recognized in the back.  Yes?  All, way in the back, against the-- MAN: Over there.  AUDIENCE: President Sutton, two years ago, we had a panel of the president and the vice president, where the power was passed from person to person. And it got to you, and you said, you had the power. The fall of 1967, there was, there was a demonstration in the business building . At that time, specific policies were set forth governing the calling of police on campus, and it stated exactly who would call the police on campus. My question is are administrators-- I trust Byron Carter. He's a smart man. I do not trust . I do not trust Captain [? Miller or ?] Captain Smith  with all the police on campus. Who has the authority to call the police on campus? JOSEPH SUTTON: Only an academic officer.  Well, now, it-- it-- all right. AUDIENCE: . JOSEPH SUTTON: This is generally designed to mean a, an academic vice president or chancellor. AUDIENCE: Name them. Who called-- AUDIENCE: Name them. AUDIENCE:  the truth about who called ? AUDIENCE:  told me personally that the IU Safety division called-- came on the phone and asked for help. JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, the IU Safety Division is not authorized-- AUDIENCE: Well, they did it. JOSEPH SUTTON: Well, then somebody authorized them.  AUDIENCE: Did somebody really authorize it? If so, who? JOSEPH SUTTON: Yes. Somebody really authorized it. I did.  AUDIENCE: I have a statement to make while we're here in this meeting, whatever it is, there is someone downtown in the courtroom now being arraigned in court for, uh, a charge of excessive noise. And the fact that a lot of you people heard, uh, the PA system going today-- well, we were running this, and I was in the back seat speaking. And then-- and Gary  was driving. And we were stopped by no less than four state police cars who started to search the car. They wouldn't ask us-- wouldn't answer a straight question as to what was wrong. They just ignored us, attempted to search the car to find anything they could to stop the announcement of this rally tonight. I want you to know that. And now, they arrested Gary. And he's downtown at court. Um-- AUDIENCE:  AUDIENCE: Why-- I have two questions. HARRY PRATTER: Make them quick, please. AUDIENCE: He's not. I have two questions, though. One, why, why, why do we have to get stopped by four state policemen on a trumped up charge, obviously? And two, where were the campus police? Why, why, why weren't they-- why were the state police-- why were four cars out there?  HARRY PRATTER: I don't-- AUDIENCE: Up by the-- up by the health center. JOSEPH SUTTON: I know nothing about it. I did not call any state police.  HARRY PRATTER: Ladies--  AUDIENCE: The-- HARRY PRATTER: Ladies and gentlemen, we have exceeded even the increased time that I thought was suitable. AUDIENCE: Just-- just one more-- one more request-- HARRY PRATTER: I thank you-- I thank you for your attention.  And I hope-- I hope that we have-- [? KEITH PARKER: ?] Now, dig. Dig. Uh, they might pull up. But we gonna hang. We gonna hang. You dig. Now, hold tight. REPORTER: And so in a tumult, this afternoon's program draws to a rather shattering conclusion. The mics have been cut on stage. And students are still attempting to speak to the crowd assembled, this 4,000 plus crowd, with reportedly another few thousand outside at the beginning. Facilities were made available so that those could view a television report of this in other parts of the campus. Speaking on this evening's, or this afternoon's program, Harry Pratter, a professor of law, and Dale Pryweller, sort of-- 