INTERVIEWER 1:  was, um,  and another thing I wanted to say was that the women standing behind you  I would like to recognize  literally  I'm going to start about the status of women. And I hope it will be explanatory in why it's important. Uh, differences exist in men and women's experience and effects of being a person with AIDS . Because issues for women in the AIDS crisis in the United States are related to their experience in this country economically, politically, socially, and personally. Differences also exist among women. Women's racial or cultural background, sexuality, and age make them vulnerable in different ways. In the first part of this speech and in the first part of your handbook, we give information about the status of women in the United States. In the handbooks, we also present a framework for explaining why the status of women is what it is, because statistics alone don't provide an explanation for the situations they describe. Uh, the basic point of this framework is that  in women's lives are not random. They're a result of long-term and continued institutional, cultural, and individual discrimination based on sex, sexuality, race and age, and some other things. I'm not going to take the time to go into that framework this afternoon in any detail. What I'm going to do is define those terms, give you some-- Popular mythology. It's literally impossible for all but a few token women or people of color to rise above the actual barriers they confront in the world. For example, in terms of the AIDS crisis, if all drugs were released tomorrow, most women in the United States of America, certainly, and women in other parts of the world, would not be able to afford this. I'll go into more about this later on. These differences in economic, political, and social power that enable ideas of white, male, heterosexual supremacy result in the continuation of white, male, heterosexual supremacy and domination-- that, in each case, only one group has the power to put ideas into action. And that's very important to remember. Cultural discrimination refers to the ideas and images which form the basis for our explanation and maintain and support institutional discrimination. In the handbook, you'll get different takes on what those images about women have been, including points by women about their own lives and by other people about women's lives. The ideas and images that are out there do not reflect the realities of our lives. When they do reflect our situations, the explanations disregard the operation of actual barriers and instead blame the victim and, indeed, call us victims when we are survivors-- \"rape victim\" instead of \"rape survivor.\" Cultural discrimination is perpetuated by the educational system, language, as well as the content of TV, books, and other forms of media. It sets up ideas about women in AIDS that affect the way we are confronted by people we have to deal with. Those images or ideas about women are racist, sexist, and heterosexist. Here's one example. The image of women as potential child bearers defined by their age vis-a-vis a menstrual cycle means that women are excluded from drug trials, their only access in most instances to traditional medical treatment for AIDS, although it's more  than admitted. Institutional and cultural discrimination get expressed through the actions of individuals. Some people are consciously bigoted, and they knowingly use their positions of privilege and power to the detriment of others. Other people, without being consciously bigoted or having an awareness of their power and privilege, can still implement institutional and cultural discrimination against others as well as in themselves. I'll give you some examples later. Here are some examples of law-- how institutional, cultural, and individual sexism, heterosexism, and racism affect the status of women and the relationship between these and women in the AIDS crisis. There are lots more in your book. I just want to say that institutional discrimination can be seen by the amounts of money  have positions of power. They're in the  laws that exist and  violence, et cetera. Comparing all women who were in the paid labor force to all men who were in the paid labor force in 1986, women only earn $0.44 on every dollar that men earn. That means that 50% of the women in the United States earned less than $7,610 that year compared to 17,114 for the men. White men earn more than black or Latin men and more than women in any ethnic and racial group. White women earn more than black and Latin women and, in most instances, less than black and Latin men. But in every ethnic and racial group, men earn more than women. One important point to keep in mind when it comes to these statistics is that the Census Bureau and other agencies don't keep any statistics about lesbians or gay men. This invisibility in itself is a form of institutional and cultural discrimination. Because of this invisibility, it's hard to figure out how many lesbians are below the poverty level or what they earn a year. So just keep in mind that they fall into every category described for women. Women's incomes are tied very strongly to their present and past marital status, much more so than men. For example, married women in 1988 had access to double the amount of money as women who were not married. That is $32,000 a year as compared to 15. Unmarried men's incomes were more than unmarried women. They had access to $21,000 compared with 15. Again, black and Latin individuals and households have less total money than white individuals and households. And in every racial and ethnic group, women have less access than men, and unmarried individuals have less access than married. These, uh, points are especially important, because the percent women living alone, especially younger women or those maintaining a household-- that is, supporting children or relatives-- has increased dramatically since 1970 while the number of married couple households with children has decreased dramatically. Living alone or supporting others alone is a situation more women than men are in. And women in each of those instances have less income than men. 88.1% of one-parent families are maintained by women compared to only 11.9% by men. And women in this situation also have less income than men in this situation. And anyone in this situation, there's no support systems. For example, in New York City in 1983, 223,900 children under the age of six had a mother in the paid labor force. And there were only 77,400 places in daycare. That women end up taking care of children is not a reflection of their naturally nurturing attitude.  Our legal system automatically gives custody of children to a heterosexual mother unless a heterosexual father contests it. On the other hand, when lesbians, or could be women with AIDS, want custody of the children and it's contested by a heterosexual-- parentheses, healthy-- father, in 99 in 100 cases, the father wins. The percent of women living under the poverty level is much higher than men in the same precinct. Younger women living alone or supporting children or relatives are especially likely to be poor, and more so if you're black or Latin, even if they are in the paid labor force, which the majority of them are-- more than a majority. Access to money and responsibility for others obviously affects many aspects of our lives. It's one reason why women are less likely to report sexual harassment on their job, even though more than 90% of women interviewed out of a 90,000-women sample said they have experienced it. It also means that lesbians are less likely to come out on their job because of the possibility of being fired. In one study, somewhere around 30% of lesbians were totally closeted on their job. That is, not one person knew they were lesbians. It means that women are more likely to be raped than owners of housing and therefore are more vulnerable to homelessness. It means that more women than men are on Medicaid, as are more black and Latin people compared to whites. And since Medicaid, on the average, covers only about 40% of those with incomes below the poverty level and a majority of those below the poverty level are women and it frequently pays less than the cost of care, those people on Medicaid are less likely-- are less likely to get things like experimental treatment, et cetera. They are also, uh, poor people, less likely to be covered by any form of Medicaid . People earning $10,000 a year or less than $10,000 a year-- and more than 50% of women are in that category. Black and Latin people and young people are more likely than any other to be uncovered by any form of medical insurance provided by governmental. That is another way that they're excluded from  of AIDS. Again, I want to remind you that institutional discrimination means that if all drugs for AIDS were released tomorrow, most women would not be able to afford them. AZT costs $8,000 to $10,000 per year. And I just want to remind you that 50% of women in the United States earn under $7,610 a year. . Besides institutional discrimination or monetary issues, we also have other built-in discriminatory practices that harm women have . In 34 states, it's legal under certain conditions for a man to rape his wife. Once every 15 seconds, a women is beaten severely enough to require medical help or police . White women who can't or don't want to have children are pitied or suspect. Black and Latin women who have children are  irresponsible. In any case, women are not considered capable of voluntarily giving up their role as a child bearer. These sexist, racist, and heterosexist images of women affect their treatment in the AIDS crisis. \"Just say no,\" sex within marriage, the monogamous relationships become the dominant ways in which women are supposed to avoid HIV infection. Prostitutes are scapegoated for AIDS while their male customers are not. The concern for children with AIDS far outweighs the concern for the mothers, who, in any case, are portrayed as, one, irresponsible for getting pregnant, whether or not they knew they were HIV positive or not, whether or not they had the power to force a man to use a condom or to control the circumstances under which they're involved in a man's sexual activity, and whether or not they had access to contraception and despite the fact that no contraception is 100% effective, especially condoms. As I said before, women are kept out of drug trials because of their childbearing potential. And I'll get into that later. At the same time, the latest drug trials for children allowed women who are pregnant to get experimental drugs during pregnancy to see if their children  transmission categories do not acknowledge the existence of lesbians with AIDS or bisexuals with AIDS. Because AIDS is a medical issue, because women have had and still have a very specific relationship with medicine that men don't have, we have to understand the relationship to that system. And that's where the second part will come and teach you that.  INTERVIEWER 2: The  is about the same effects as witchcraft.  conception of a woman. Number one,  minds of men in a moment of passion. Number two, by obstructing their regenerative force. Number three are the moving members accommodated to that act. Four, by changing men into beasts by their magic acts. Five, by applying degenerative force in women to six,  abortion. Seven, by ordering children to the devil. Besides other animals, . My name is  history of women healers and the images of women in the 19th to early 20th centuries. Witch hunts in Europe had began in the 14th century as a well-organized campaign initiated, financed, and executed by church and state. Witch hunts were focused on mostly peasant women who practiced the art of healing. Though kings and nobles has their own court physicians, often priests, women healers were often the only general medical practitioners for the poor. Witch healers were a great threat to the church. As their  interference with the will of god,  with the help of the devil. And therefore,  is assumed to be evil itself. Nursing entered the medical profession as an acceptable, ladylike career. Florence Nightingale insisted that nursing  or examined any more than motherhood. She also said, \"With the nurse, as with the soldier, whether we think it's right or not is not the question. Prompt obedience is the question. You're not in control but under control.\"  treated by medical professionals. It's important to understand the popular images of women in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Because of the rapidly changing economic system, class differences amongst American women were particularly strong. Biomedical thought provided two distinct views of women based on their class.  women were seen as inherently sick. Puberty was seen as a crisis, throwing the entire female organism into turmoil. Menstruation, or lack of it, was regarded as pathological . Pregnancy was considered a disease, making women incapacitated and demanding the care of a doctor. Menopause was, of course, the final, incurable ill, the death of the woman and women. The confinement of  women forced a cult of hypochondria and female invalidism that began in the mid 19th century and continued until the early 20th century. Sickness  culture.  and female specialists became popular. Hysteria epitomized with the the cult of female invalidism. Doctors insisted that hysteria was a real disease, a disease of the uterus. In fact, \"hysteria\" comes from the Greek word for uterus. In 1974, Dr. Lucien Warner, a popular medical authority, said, \"It is not hard work and privation which make the women of our country invalids but the circumstance and habits intimately connected with wealth and refinement.\" The same doctor also said in the same year, \"The African negress who toils besides her husband in the fields in the south and she who washes and scrubs and toils in our homes in the north enjoy the most part good health with comparative immunity from uterine disease.\" Women of the lower classes were viewed as robust but also dirty and contagious, threatening public health. The reality, of course, was very different. Working class women work long hours, often using  conditions  far more than wealthy women-- disease, complications, and childbirth. There was also, at the time, a third class of sick women surfacing. These sick women were lesbians. These images of women of all classes were threatened to serve the financial interests of the medical profession. Women were not only disqualified as competent healers and therefore eliminated competition. These ideas make women highly qualified .  JUDITH: Hi. I'm Judith, and my topic is women as patients. I'm going to talk about some of the ways in which the medical establishment in this country punishes female sexuality, male contraception and STDs, Sexually Transmitted Diseases. First, female contraception. Female contraception is untested and unsafe, imperialistic big money .  In heterosexual sex, women have always had to take responsibility with contraception. Similarly, the AIDS crisis public health campaigns call on women to make the men wear condoms. Medical and governmental procedures for new contraceptive methods for women have not protected women. The financial interests of the drug industry and the medical profession take precedence over the needs and the safety of women, especially poor women, women of color, and third-world women. Here are some illustrations. Depo-Provera, an injectable contraceptive shown to cause cancer in test animals, was nevertheless recommended in 1974 by the FDA advisory committee for certain groups of women such as the . The same drug has been widely used in the US to prevent miscarriage in the last decade. Two US hospitals serving mainly black and Latino women were recently found to use this contraceptive. The maker of Depo-Provera, the  drug company, ranked 160th on the Fortune 500 last year with profits of $305 million. The pill, now known to have such deadly side effects as cancer, blood clotting, strokes, and increased susceptibility to STDs, was approved by the FDA on the basis of one study. This study, conducted in the late 1950s, involved 132 Puerto Rican women who took it for over a year and 718 others who took it less than a year. Of those women, five deaths were studied. There were no autopsies. In a 1976 pill study involving 398 chicanas, 76 who thought they were getting contraceptives were actually given placebos. 10 got pregnant. In 1970, when the dangers of the pill were becoming known, the AMA of the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology opposed to package inserts in the pill on the grounds that they would, quote, \"intrude on the patient-physician relationship and confuse a lot of .\" So much for informed consent. Protests came also from organized medicine in drug companies and population control groups. They advocate  and omitted the reference to . On the IUD. In 1968, the FDA  to pressure by the makers of the IUD and eliminated the requirement for testing it on animals before selling it to women. As a result, women would be the guinea pigs for the device now well known to be dangerous. In 1973, the CDC estimated that 7,900 IUD-related hospitalizations took place in the first half of that year alone. The IUD can cause severe cramps, exceptionally heavy menstrual flow, irritation, and pelvic infections and perforations of the uterus. The Dalkon Shield, one type of IUD, appeared on the market basis of one study, in which less than half the women used the device for a whole year. A year later, the FDA reported that the Dalkon Shield was . It is still available to millions of women in the world. And the AH Robins  first of which  last year with a total practice of $1.6 billion. Sterilizations. The history of sterilization shows two sites of women's struggles for control of their own bodies. While some women fought for voluntary sterilization for contraceptive purposes, others, usually low-income women of color or women on welfare, were being sterilized against their will-- even without their knowledge-- as a result of official population control policies. In 1979, a  from American Indian, black, and Latina women, feminist health activists, alternative media, religious and community social action groups, HEW issued regulations to stop sterilization groups. But as of the mid '80s, according to many activists, this  become the most frequent form of contraception for married couples. The majority of those sterilized are low-income women on Medicaid. Hysterectomies have become the most common of all major surgical procedures-- about 800,000 a year. Their side effects, minimized by doctors, include severe bone and joint pain, loss of libido, profound fatigue, hair loss, and memory loss. Since 1979, the media and the medical profession have publicized the reversibility of tubal ligations-- tube tying-- as a simpler form of sterilization. This is misleading. Actually, there's only a 20% success rate for reversing this operation and . No current female contraceptive is both safe and infallible. The safest methods are the diaphragm, , the rhythm method, and the male condom. But these need safe, legal, affordable abortion as a backup. Currently, abortion is legal, but poor women may not use Medicaid funds to pay for it. The legality of abortion, achieved only in 1973, is now under pressure by the right. The Supreme Court this term will decide a case which could further restrict access to abortion by allowing states to prohibit the use of state funds for abortions and even for abortion . Meanwhile, the pharmaceutical industry ranked first of all major industries in the US in 1987 in terms of  sales and assets. Now, I'm going to talk about male contraception, the terrifying possibility.  Since women take care of contraception, it's not surprising that unlike female contraceptives, those for men are few, hardly researched or promoted, and tested with the utmost care.  Research on a male pill is held up, because scientists are reluctant to subject men to large doses of sex hormones that affect the entire body. However, this is exactly how the female pill works. From 1921 to 1975, several researchers developed safe, cheap, effective means of causing temporary infertility in men by applying heat to the testicles via water, insulated underwear, ultrasound, and other sources. However, all work on TMS, Temporary Male Sterilization, was impeded by lack of funding or administrative obstacles. One researcher was told he had to test ultrasound on 10 men with cancerous prostates before he could work with healthy subjects. In three years, he could find only one such volunteer. Obviously, his research didn't progress very fast. The same researcher in 1975 was using ultrasound to treat herpes simplex in women. He was not required to test it first on women with vaginal cancer. The male sex organs are a holy land to scientists.  We inject hundreds of chemicals into the woman's uterus, but we never touch the testes.  While TMS research went unfunded, the Population Council in the 1970s funded investigation in such female contraceptive methods as the injection of  formaldehyde tissue  into the uterus. No new male contraceptive was introduced on the market between 1976 and 1985. Researchers in the early '80s estimated it would be 20 years before another one would appear. The vasectomy, a safe, cheap, reversible male sterilization operation which does not affect sexual performance, is commonly described by doctors who know better as castrating. It has never been widely performed or promoted. Now, I'm going to talk about STDs. Even before AIDS, STDs were an epidemic in the US. It is reasonable to infer that the medical establishment's response to women in AIDS will resemble the response to women in STDs. Research and funding for STDs in the US focuses on curing men while largely ignoring women. Gonorrhea. 95% of men with gonorrhea have symptoms, are tested, treated, and cured. The Gram stain test for gonorrhea is 99% accurate for men but only 50% accurate for women. About 60% of women with gonorrhea are considered asymptomatic and not tested. Similarly, for chlamydia, the most common STD, 80% of women are considered asymptomatic versus 30% to 40% of men. Actually, women are symptomatic, but their symptoms are less specific than men's, and the medical establishment does not educate women to recognize them. This has serious implications for AIDS. The history of women in STDs suggests first that women may well be manifesting AIDS in completely different ways from men and second that the medical establishment may be failing both to explore these problems and to develop appropriate treatment or preventative measures. About 700,000 women a year in 1977 contracted gonorrhea, many unaware of it. Gonorrhea is more harmful to women than to men. Undetected gonorrhea often leads to pelvic inflammatory disease, whose side effects include agonizing pain, sterility, and irreparable damage to the fallopian tubes and ovaries. In 1977, gonorrhea accounted for the hospitalization of about 3,200 women per day. There were about a million cases of pelvic inflammatory disease in 1985. If gonorrhea is hard to detect in women, there is no reliable routine test for women. Prevention is the only means of protection. But the medical establishment has always preferred cures over prevention. In the case of VD, to stress prevention would also mean accepting non-marital sex. And the medical establishment prefers to take an anti-sex stance. The AMA's 1974 policy on VD recommended one, fidelity incontinence in married couples, and two, abstinence by unmarried individuals. This policy does not stop men from getting adequate testing and treatment but leaves women out in full. Preventive efforts for VD have traditionally protected men, not women. In the 19th century, women were regarded as VD carriers, men as their . The discovery that married men were infecting their wives was greeted with ridicule and outrage by the medical establishment. In 1860s England, the Contagious Diseases Act required forcible cleansing of women for the use of men by compelling prostitutes in  towns to register, be examined, and if diseased, be confined up to five months. The men who bought the prostitutes were not treated this way. Since at least 1930, top -- for example, contraceptive jelly and douches-- have been shown to protect women from VD. But government and medical authorities continue to stress curing, not preventing, VD, an approach which does not work for women, since their symptoms are not recognized.  MARIAN: I worked in the feminist health movement for about eight years. And I'm going to talk about five principles of that movement, how we applied them in practice, and draw a parallel to the AIDS activist movement for us to discuss today. Hopefully, we'll get to some questions and answers. First, though, some facts about the feminist health movement. After Our Bodies, Ourselves was published in newsprint in 1969, women had the first easy access to information about birth control, abortion, childbirth, and sex. And prior to that time, all information about women's health was only in medical textbooks, which are not the most accessible language. The first two feminist clinics opened in 1970 in Chicago and Minneapolis. And then in 1971, Carol Downer and Lorraine Rothman did a cross-country tour, setting up self-help groups, demonstrating vaginal self exam-- which I'll talk about a little later-- and distributing speculums and other self-help supplies. These self-help groups, which sprung up as a result of this tour about those 25 cities, then became the backbone of the feminist health movement. By 1973, 35 feminist-controlled clinics had been established, and 116 women's centers included health advocacy as an active part of their program. This number ballooned to 1,200 by 1974. Many other books were published. Women started demanding information from their doctors. Women started becoming midwives and going back to midwives. And they started researching herbs. And more women went to medical school than ever before until the early days of healers. In short, a consumer health movement had been launched. The first principle I want to talk about in the feminist health movement is that we believed that women's medical treatment would be sexist. Women didn't trust doctors and couldn't trust getting good health care, because a visit to a doctor was humiliating, degrading, and uninformative. The women's liberation movement provided the context for us to change this. We felt that we couldn't control our lives until we could control our bodies. So we confronted this inequality in our relationship to doctors and set out to change it. The activation of this principle was in believing that every woman could understand her anatomy, could learn basic health maintenance measures, and so informed could make her own decisions about health care independent from her doctor. So we changed the way health care was delivered by incorporating education into service in a way that you never get at a doctor's office and by developing training programs for laywomen to be health workers. We wanted to put women's health back into women's hands and openly oppose and challenge the historic reporting of health information by professionals. The parallel to the AIDS movement here is pretty clear. The system won't provide good health care for PWAs unless we fight for it. This assumption is already held by many poor people and people of color. It comes out of their experience. As  says in the book [? AIDS ?] [? for ?] [? Women, ?] quote, \"AIDS has highlighted a lot of problems which already existed. Minorities knew about the problems, but the gay community wasn't bothered by them before. Now, minorities are saying, welcome to the deal.\" Unquote. The next principle is seizing control of women's health. This meant demystifying common procedures and critiquing current medical practices. One of the most exciting and radical projects I wanted to talk about was the Jane Collective. It was organized by 40 women from the Chicago Women's Liberation Union in 1969. Jane advertised very simply in Chicago papers with a message, call Jane from Women's Liberation for abortion information. Women would call, get a message, leave their phone number. Jane women would call them back. And Jane arranged safe, legal abortions for these women. The women would be given an address, counseled by Jane members, driven blindfolded to a place where the abortion would be performed. And then that place would change periodically. Jane members themselves did everything but the abortion itself. When they discovered that the doctor they had hired to do the abortions wasn't a doctor at all, they had also been observing him long enough to realize that they could do it themselves. I don't know if people know this, but abortion is a very simple procedure. It requires no anesthesia, no cuttings, and anyone  technique. They fired their abortionist, cut their price to $50, and provided 11,000 women with safe abortions from 1969 to 1973.  They had no fatalities, and they practiced anonymously and semi-underground. The next, um, sort of exciting development within the feminist health movement happened in April 1971 when Carol Downer took a plastic speculum, which is a tool that is used to open the vagina to reveal the cervix, which is the neck of the uterus-- she took this plastic speculum, put it inside her own body, used a mirror and a flashlight to look and see her own cervix, and she did this in front of a recorder. And it was enraging, because it was so simple. This is what doctors have been charging us too money to look at, and it was completely mystifying, and we could completely do it ourselves. So Carol and other women she worked with at the time started dropping their pants for everyone who wanted to look.  And thousands of women did want to look and took their speculums themselves and did it themselves and showed other women their cervixes. And the point was that if you could see more than just your own cervix, you would develop a point of comparative reference and be able to spot-- no, it's -- be able to spot them differently, the normal changes that your cervix went through, and maintain more responsibility for your own health care. After all, a doctor, at most, sees your cervix once a year. So women, by doing self-examination, can spot all sorts of things. You can spot fertile mucus for birth control. You can spot vaginal infections before they even start itching and deal with them with herbs. And the very act of self-examination in front of other women broke down barriers. It brought out our commonality. It was totally collective. It encouraged women to share experiences, to touch down there, and, um, to demand a different kind of treatment from their doctors. We also, um, shared a lot of information about common sense treatments and home remedies, much to the chagrin of the medical establishment. So we would use yogurt for vaginal infections and developed herbal recipes for birth control and early abortion and experimented with vitamin C as an early abortion. We basically learned from each other's experiences and validated women's anecdotal experiences rather than always needing to, like-- oh, it wasn't sufficiently studied. It didn't matter. Women had experienced it. The AIDS movement has done a pretty good job of making information available and demystifying both the immune system and treatments that are available. The list is long. You know it. CRI, Body Positive, you know, um, AIDS for . But the challenge still exists for that information to get beyond our own circles. In order for PWAs to be able to demand proper kind of treatment, everybody has to understand their immune system, just like we were fighting-- women had to understand their basic body at work. We have to simplify the immune system so that it's comprehensible, because you can't understand how a drug-- how an experimental drug is going to work on your body unless you understand how your immune system works. The-- some PWA groups have also started sharing different self-help kinds of remedies, like urine therapy for KS treatments or different herbal treatments or acupuncture. And these things also need to be made more available so that PWAs themselves can make their own decisions. That's-- that's the key. We believe that doctors did not have the right to make decisions for women. Similarly, even though a doctor may have more information to start out with than a PWA, a lot educated PWAs know a lot more about their body, what's going on with it, and about current treatments than their doctors do. Um, PWAs have to be empowered to be able to make those decisions themselves. The feminist health movement also worked to critique all medical treatments and to make alternative treatments available. One success that we had was getting the FDA to revoke suspected pregnancy as an indication for the use of the morning after pill, which is DES. So I think Judith talked about DES before. This was a drug that had been used as an anti-miscarriage drug in the '50s and now is being used as a drug to bring on a miscarriage in the '70s. It doesn't make sense. So following, um, a women's health conference in Boston in 1975, a bunch of women went down to the FDA, demonstrated outside, and went in and-- and demanded that the FDA change their practice. So, um, they did take off that indication, and we should just acknowledge that ACT UP and ACT NOW were not the first people to demonstrate at the FDA.  Another parallel is, in looking at the dangers of the pill and the IUD and the toxicity of AZT. The pill, as Judith laid out, is a very dangerous drug. But most women, if they understand the risks at all, . And also, the risks are not commonly known. Um, and once the pill was developed and drug companies started making lots of money off of it, research on other methods of birth control basically stopped, except for the cervical cap, which did get accepted by the FDA without  studies on what they had, um, also through the insistence of women's health projects. And it's clear in what we're doing and why we're doing it that, uh, the AIDS movement-- if the AIDS movement didn't fight for the development of other drugs, we would be left with only AZT. Um, another principle with working collectively-- we came out of consciousness-raising model on the-- of the feminist movement and the women's liberation movement, and we rejected the hierarchical male model, where individuals vie for power and control within a group. And we made all of our decisions, both our business decisions and our political decisions, collectively. And we tried to equalize members of the group. Um, after all, to be anything other than  individual solutions to what the government is not doing, self-help health has to be collective, because it also has to empower people so that we can organize them to that end and organize ourselves to act. We also struggled to be autonomous from the government. This fight began with a, um, demand to repeal rather than reform abortion laws. We did not want any mention of abortion on the books at all, just like there's no mention of tonsillectomy separately identified by law. Abortion should be the same kind of medical procedure as a tonsillectomy. Um, we lost that fight. We-- um, a number of feminist groups had to accept birth control money from the government, which opened them up to a higher level of scrutiny. Heidi's going to talk a little bit more about the impact of government intervention on the feminist health movement, so I won't go into that. Um, the main point is that we have to remember that money means strings attached. It doesn't mean that we won't take the money--  --or that we won't demand money but that we have to realize what it means politically. A great example here was when [? Adapt ?] stated publicly that they would go distribute clean needles, way before the needle exchange program ever came to fruition, even if it meant jeopardizing their city funding. That's autonomy. So are AL721 kitchen labs or alternative grassroots creative testing sites. Should the government decide to eliminate anonymous testing or require contact tracing, we could develop our own testing sites. People will develop the means when the government won't do it or when they don't trust the government to do it. The other issue with autonomy is, uh, an issue about alliances. Um, feminist clinics avoided alliances with population control forces in particular, and-- because we knew that they did not act in the best interest of women. We thought that women should be able to have none or as many children as they wanted. Population control forces, particularly, uh, like Planned Parenthood, don't have that same philosophy. Um, they think the number of children you should have is required by how much money you have and what education you can give them and all those other kinds of racist and classist assumptions. But when the anti-abortion movement became stronger, we had to make alliances with Planned Parenthood. And, uh, we had to keep in mind that if we didn't fight for the connection between abortion rights and sterilization abuse, for example, that nobody else would. In fact, Planned Parenthood and more mainstream groups ended up being more powerful than we were. They had more money. And now, a politic that means that sterilization is the number one preferred, quote unquote, \"method of birth control\" for women in the country today means that that politic won and did prevail. Um, we have to think about single-issue alliances in the AIDS movement also. For example, um, before we would align with those who would deregulate the FDA but not increase access to treatment, we have to think about what those alliances mean politically and what kind of power we could bring to bear to change that alliance. And we also have to look at alliances with progressive and independent service providers with activist groups. One of our faults was in not connecting in a better way with activist groups like, for example, the Committee Against Abortion Rights and Sterilization Abuse, CARASA, with the feminists who were out there in the field doing direct service work. That's a mistake that the, uh, AIDS activist movement, I hope, doesn't repeat, because you get a different sense of what the day-to-day realities are that you have to be fighting for. OK. Thank you.  HEIDI: My name's Heidi, by the way. And I'm going to talk about some of the decline and some of the obstacles, um, that occurred during the feminist health movement. And during its heyday in the '70s, uh, the feminist health movement had about-- there were about 40 feminist clinics throughout the country run by feminist groups-- um, women providing services, um, consciousness-raising groups, women's centers, women's action projects. And now, in the '80s, the late '80s, there's probably about 15 feminist clinics left in the United States. Um, clearly, there's been a decline in the movement. And, um, we can obviously see that. It's no-- it's not-- it's no coincidence that this has happened in the '80s with, you know, a Republican administration, waves of conservatism, that kind of thing. And it's helpful for us, I believe, to look at the decline of the feminist health movement to better understand its successes and failures and also to see how we can apply those to our movement. Um, we sort of see the decline in the feminist health movement, um, taking place specifically under the influence of a three-pronged attack. Um, and it's further debilitated by internal struggles within the movement itself. The three elements of the attack on the feminist health movement included a response by the medical establishment, repression by the government, and the rise of the right wing. The medical establishment responded to the feminist health movement because it was threatened by it economically and as well as-- AUDIENCE: Philosophically. HEIDI: Yeah, yeah, philosophically. Um, these feminist clinics, uh, immediately threatened economic security of the medical establishment by providing services to poor people, uh, challenging the market price of common services like abortion. And more importantly, they were teaching women how to stay out of the doctor's office. Um, so the medical establishment was obviously a little nervous. And they responded to that by, uh, slandering women who worked with these clinics, um, withdrawing their services from these clinics, um, and basically trying to monopolize the service of providing help to women. Uh, a good example of this occurred in Tallahassee, Florida, where local doctors, OB-GYNs, sort of conspired to, uh, make certain that no local doctors worked in the local feminist clinic. And how they did this was, um, they threatened residencies, um, residents at the hospitals, uh,  doctors who wanted to work with clinics. A feminist clinic in Tallahassee responded by filing a federal antitrust suit against the doctors. So, um, they did eventually win. But it took five years, drained a lot of resources, um, financial and emotional, of the people involved in the clinic. The government, um, responded to the rise of the feminist health movement, uh, a couple ways. I think the most obvious, uh, way that they tried to repress it was what I call sort of anti-woman legislation. Um, since Roe versus Wade, which legalized abortion, there have been constant attacks, a lot, um, at local state legislative levels, attacking the right of women to have free, safe-- or safe, accessible abortions. And how that, um, attack is common is things like attempts at spousal consent bills, um, what do you call it? Parental consent bills, which are trying to make women get consent from someone else to get control over what goes on in their bodies. And obviously, the thing that's most obvious as far as, um, limiting access to abortion is the Hyde Amendment, which, in 1977, said there would be no federal funding for abortions. Medicaid does not pay for abortions. Um, we can also see government repression in things like surveillance, harassment of women and the clinics, um, and the attempt of arrest of, um, women, uh, health practitioners. There is a case in Santa Cruz where there was an actual police undercover sting operation trying to nab midwives. And these women cops, uh, pretended like they needed prenatal services, and they snagged this midwife. So it was like a big sting operation, like they had nothing else better to do. Um, since-- since repression  that and, uh, attempt by law enforcement to, uh, to really concentrate on actually arresting midwives and women who provide services, there really are very few lay healers left in this country and certainly not providing services to women. Probably the most vicious attack was, uh, that the feminist health movement was subject to was by the right and derived from the right. It's very apparent that since Roe versus Wade, the right has mobilized around the abortion issue and clinics that have provided the service. And we can see that, sort of the reshaping of the abortion question, is becoming not an issue of basic rights for a woman to control-- control what goes on in her body, but more an issue of murdering a fetus. We're changing it from a medical issue to a moral issue. And we can obviously see parallels between that and the AIDS crisis. Um, another tool of the right has obviously been violence. It's harassment, and it's harassment of people who work in clinics and actual bombing of the right to clinics. In 1984, there was a-- there was a feminist clinic in Everett, Washington. It was bombed-- in five months, it was bombed four times. And the fourth time, it was eventually, um, just completely destroyed. It's never opened since then. Then between-- I believe it was 1980 and 1986-- there were over 100 bombings and fires at feminist health clinics, any place that provided abortion services. We obviously see things like, uh-- another act of aggression can be seen in Operation Rescue, using civil disobedience to shut down clinics so women can't get in and have services. Um, finally, there's, uh, the internal struggles of the feminist health movement. Um, the feminist health movement, like any movement, was not free of things like homophobia, racism, and classism. And one issue that this was-- can be-- those issues can be seen is the issue of sterilization abuse. Um, in the past and still, unfortunately, to this day, in some cases, doctors often sterilized poor women without their knowledge or consent. And it took federal intervention on the part of informed-- enforced consent laws trying to stop that. Unfortunately, there were some feminist activists who opposed this consent law, because included with that was a waiting period, a 30-day waiting period, where women had to wait 30 days before they could go ahead with their sterilization. Um, this-- there were splits because of this in the feminist community. Um, many of the community-- the community most directly affected by sterilization abuse, black and Latin communities, were the ones supporting the 30-day waiting period. And there were other feminists who were opposing that. And obviously, this is no way to build a coalition that's involved communities of color and feminist health workers. Um, and finally, the thing that was probably most detrimental, or one of the things most detrimental to the feminist health movement, was, uh, poor working conditions, long hours, burnout, no money. Uh, a lot of just women really just burned out and  by the women replacing them in feminist health care.  MARIAN: This is it for the first half. But we wanted to take a few minutes to answer questions from the presenters this morning, so if they'll come up, all of us. And then during the intermission, um, we'll do a slide show. Um, so all right. AUDIENCE: I have a question for Heidi. Um, what was the logic-- what was the logic behind the 30-day waiting period to obtain sterilization? HEIDI: The-- well, I mean, an example, I guess, uh, that best describes that is, uh, women-- poor women going in to, say, get an abortion sometimes getting sterilized without their knowledge or, uh, the consent forms being in a different-- uh, like, if they were in Spanish, people couldn't read them. But 30 days is giving a woman a period to at least try and understand the information that's in front of her and have time to think about it. AUDIENCE: They would have people sign them, like, as they were going into the operating room. HEIDI: Yes. AUDIENCE: Here, quick, sign this. AUDIENCE: Right. AUDIENCE: So if you have that time, then you're not getting fooled. AUDIENCE: Um, I have a question for Marian about-- earlier, when you said that when Our Bodies, Ourselves came out, for the first time, women had information about their own bodies. And I heard somebody behind me say, sure, if you can read. And I think that's an important parallel for the AIDS women that I want to ask about. Um, but did the-- the feminist health movement respond to the challenge of bringing information to populations that don't get information by the same channels as-- as the bourgeoisie does? MARIAN: The main way that we did it was to be very graphic. So we would take off our pants as show and use a lot of pictures-- um, these kinds of pictures. And we provided services to women in groups so that women would hear from each other their experiences. And we would explain things verbally a lot. I mean, so, uh, a regular annual exam at our clinic could take three hours as opposed to the 10 minutes that you spend at a doctor. INTERVIEWER 1: Also, people did develop media, um, during the-- the feminist health movement. Lots of slide shows, people went around and did slide shows and made films, although similarly, there wasn't a lot of money around to be able to do that. It often took a long time to get those things together so we could get funding. MARIAN: And also, video wasn't so available then. You know, this is, uh, 15 years ago. So, um, we didn't use that medium either. AUDIENCE: Um, you mentioned the, uh, the infighting and the lack of coalition-- the lack of communication between, uh, minority-- quote unquote, \"minority populations\" and mainline feminists. Um, how-- how were those lines of communication inefficient? And how can they be improved in this crisis? What-- what-- what did you learn from the women's health movement that would help the AIDS movement, uh, keep in touch with this city, the IVDU community, um, the African American communities, or, you know, the Latino community? MARIAN: Well, we can go back to sterilization to look at that question. So the-- the 30-day waiting period was-- that whole fight started at about 1977. That's pretty late in the feminist health movement. So really, starting in 1971, a movement that was predominantly white did not take on the issues that were affecting black and Latino women. So that's what I would say. We have to really take on those issues as our own, because they aren't different. HEIDI: But at times, uh, which I didn't say, which, uh, I think is, um, stupid of me, is, too-- we're sort of not acknowledging a lot of women, um, black-- in black and Latin communities who did a lot of this work themselves, that I didn't even mention. And I apologize for that. MARIAN: Right. So for example, um, a black women's health project developed out of the National Women's Health Network in about 1976 out of the failure of the rest of the movement to deal and out of the fact that those women has been doing that work for the last five years. INTERVIEWER 1: I guess, also, to understand that you're deman-- what you see as your demands are from your point of view. If you start translating them, they become very different. OK. That's why, you know, I mentioned the thing about releasing drugs. If you release drugs and people don't have access to them, you're fine, and nobody else is. Same thing happened around the abortion issue, which was that most mainstream groups come out when abortion is going to be made illegal. In 1977, when poor women were denied Medicaid, you couldn't get women out to march, because those women who could afford it went home. So if it's going to say anything, it's going to stay-- stay around for the long haul. AUDIENCE: Question for Heidi or anybody. But you had said something about there was an internal struggle within the movement to work together. Could you say anything more about that? HEIDI: Um, well, I was trying to make that using sterilization abuse as an issue that was not mobilized around in some communities of the feminist health movement, and it was in others. Obviously, it caused a split. And issues, I mean, the example that Maxine just said about how the Hyde Amendment-- when poor women couldn't get money to get an abortion, I mean, where was everybody then? It's obviously-- I mean, abortion became legal-- legal, and then everyone, you know, went home is what she said. It's a good point, that you leave out a lot of people if you don't deal with issues of race and class. INTERVIEWER 1: The other issue I want to raise is homophobia, because I worked with that group of people. Most people consider, in the-- in the feminist health movement, considered abortion the bottom line. To this day, lesbians don't have any right to exist. And nobody considers that . They still jump up as soon as Roe v. Wade is attacked, even though in all the years that Roe v. Wade has been here, they have-- they-- they have not done work around lesbian issues. And what that meant in clinics was that they-- you know, like lesbian health nights took second place and all that stuff. So even though there were lots of lesbians working in that movement, eventually, a lot of lesbians got really burned out and a lot of these sort of fights. MARIAN: The other thing is just about money. I mean, our-- I worked in about eight different clinics, all connected with the Feminist Women's Health Center. We never had a budget over about a half a million dollars. So, you know, just contrast that to . JUDITH: Um, to add onto what Maxine said, um, the National Organization of Women in the '70s tried to kick out lesbians, because they would be too harmful to their future as a women's movement. So lesbians had to fight very hard to be included. AUDIENCE: Um, in terms of the contemporary politics of contraception, can you comment on-- I forget the name of the drug that  developed that there was a big fight in France, uh, over-- MARIAN: RU486? SUBJECT 6: Yeah, right. Can anybody kind of comment on that? MARIAN: Yeah, I'll-- I'll comment on it.  I think it's horrible. RU486 is a massive dose of prostaglandin, which is a chemical hormone. And we know, we have the experience of DES, which was chemical hormones that caused a vaginal cancer in daughters of women who took it. And some men also had testicular problems following that. We know that the pill, which is also chemical hormones, is a dangerous drug. So I think RU486 needs a lot more consideration. And really, abortion, as it's currently-- in early stages, abortion is such a simple procedure. I'm not kidding. Anybody can learn how to do it. So to bombard your body with all these chemicals, I don't think it's a good idea. I also think that the thing that was empowering about what the feminist health movement tried to do around abortion was to politicize it and to collectivize it and make it every woman's issue and every woman's problem. RU486 will take it completely individually into her house. She'll feel shame. Even though it's early, you know, it's still-- unless we take on this issue that the woman's life is more important than the fetus' life, it's going to be the same deal. INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah, I want to say that that was developed in France, too, which is a very heavily Catholic country and which, you know, that's-- that's, like, a good way to do it as opposed to an abortion, which is-- you know, a clear abortion means that women don't have to deal with that issue. MARIAN: I mean, I think women should have a choice. And as it's developed, women should have a choice. But women should have a clear-- clear information about what the risks are. JUDITH: I just want to add about that, when there was a recent article about it in the Sunday Times Magazine, which I borrowed so I could study what the medical establishment's response to this drug was, how it got approved, how it was tested, all this stuff-- not a word. I mean, the media was just not interested on how it got tested and how safe it was. It was all-- 