SPEAKER 1: It's my very distinct pleasure to welcome you all to the second Patten lecture of this week. It's customary to say a word or two about William Patten. And as I was walking over to this building, I thought thinking about really some 4,000, 5,000 students who would be graduating this year and maybe walking around campus today and thinking, wouldn't it be nice if some future day, some Balkan poet or a Balkan artist would come and give us or her impressions about this year to us. 

Well, if you take yourself back by have about 100 years, 1893, a student from here graduated, and I do not know exactly what he was thinking, but he certainly thought and wrote that would be nice if people, scholars, from outside Bloomington would come and share their experience and research results with us, maybe from New York, maybe from the West Coast, and wouldn't it be nice for the students in Bloomington to enjoy the talk and learn from them? 

About 40 years down the road, he made a bequest, which has grown and which has been added. Some other moneys have been added to it, which makes it possible for us to invite people like Alexander Astin to come here and share his research results with us. That person was William Patten. I invite now Professor [INAUDIBLE] of the Department of English, who's also the chancellor of the campus, to introduce Professor Astin. 

SPEAKER 2: [INAUDIBLE] if I can. Alexander Astin's contributions to our understanding about students, faculty, and the dynamics of the American university form a record of service and achievement really unmatched in the field of higher education. The scope of his research encompasses nearly every major debate that has concerned administrators and student affairs professionals over the past four years. His leadership of major organizations has helped set the agenda for the scholars and students of higher education. 

The massive annual survey of freshmen, he founded and directed for more than 30 years, the longest running research program, by the way, in American higher education, has provided extraordinary collection of data on the values added to [INAUDIBLE], as well as landing a place on the Rolodexes of countless journalists writing on important social trends. 

His vast experience, extraordinary productivity, and unique insights have shaped and improved the work done by those who have dedicated their careers serving and better understanding the needs of faculty and students. He received his Bachelor's degree in music at Gettysburg College, his PhD in psychology from the University of Maryland. After holding positions of the National Merit Scholarship Corporation and as Director of Research of the American Council of education, he moved, as you know, to UCLA, where he is the Allan Murray Carter Professor of Higher Education and Director of the Higher Education Research Institute. 

He is author and co-author of 18 books, more than 300 articles, monographs, chapters, other publications. Besides his annual reports on American freshmen, his best known works include the landmark Four Critical Years, which for more than a decade was the most frequently cited work in higher education literature. In his follow-up study on Madison College, Four Critical Years Revisited, published in 1993, Professor Astin analyzed data from more than 20,000 students, 25,000 faculty members, and 200 institutions to discover our academic program, faculty, student peer groups, and other factors effect student development. He then provided recommendations how our colleges and universities could enhance the experiences of their undergraduates. 

He holds 10 honorary degrees. He's received distinguished research and service awards from virtually every major association in his field. As recognized by Change magazine as a person, quote, most admired for creative insightful thinking in the field of higher education, end quote. This week, as many of you know, he's been working formally and informally with administrators, faculty, and students on the Bloomington campus as a guest of the Patten Foundation lectures program, which is, as you just heard, the university's most distinguished visiting lectureship. 

His nomination was supported not only by the faculty in the School of Education, but by colleagues in philosophy, in religious studies, in business, and [INAUDIBLE], as well as numerous administrators at the campus level. So I'm very pleased he will deliver the keynote address for this annual spring symposium. This topic, as you know, what kind of student success is that we want to promote? Please join me in welcoming Professor Astin. 

[APPLAUSE] 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Thanks, everybody. I hope I can manage this thing without dropping it. Let me see here. OK. Does that do it? Good. Can you all hear me in the back all right? OK. 

I'm going to put the light on here, so I can see. As we all know, we traditionally define student success while the student is in college in terms of the time honored grade point average, or if we want to do a minimal kind of success, passing courses, and finishing a degree program. And if we want to look at it at high level, we've defined it in terms of receiving honors of various kinds. 

And then after college, we look at success in terms of such things as entry to graduate school or perhaps what kind of graduate school you're able to enter, how elite it is, or whether we get a job, and especially, what kind of job and indeed, how much it pays. Earnings have been used in many cases as measures of success. 

But in a sense, these are all, in one way or another, traditional academic measures or vocational measures. Earnings, for example, is probably the equivalent in a sense of the GPA, the post-college equivalent and so forth. So these things are all connected, academic and vocational measures of success. 

Now, the premise of my talk this afternoon is that while there's nothing inherently wrong or sinful about these traditional measures, they are simply not enough. And if we persist in linking our conception of student success or limiting our conception of student success in this way, we are selling short, not only our institutions and our students, but also the society that supports this. 

Let me try to explain why I believe this is so. There is mounting evidence that the quality of civic life and civic engagement in the United States has been eroding in recent years. The list of problems is a long one, and I don't want to belabor it. But let me just review a few of these things, shaky race relations, growing economic disparities and inequities, excessive materialism, decaying inner cities, a deteriorating infrastructure, a weakening public school system, an irresponsible mass media, declining civic engagement, and the increasing effect-- excuse me-- the decreasing effectiveness of governmental agencies and people to name just a few. 

In a democracy, of course, citizen disengagement from politics and government ineffectiveness not only go hand in hand, but also cripple our capacity to educate each new generation of leaders in government, business, law, medicine, the clergy, and other advanced professions. Since our colleges and universities educate each new generation of leaders in these fields and train all the personnel who teach the entire population at the pre-collegiate level, we in the higher education community must bear some responsibility for these societal problems that disturb us so much. 

Apparently, our graduates are not successful enough in these other areas to begin to solve these social problems, and indeed, may have become a part of the problem. And considering that our higher education system is generally regarded as the finest one in the world, we need to ask ourselves where have we gone wrong? 

The more I reflect on the problems confronting higher education and the larger society, the more I become convinced that at the heart of these problems, in trying to affect positive social change, is a question of beliefs. And as those of you who heard me Tuesday night will know, this is sort of my current preoccupation. By this, I mean not only our beliefs about what student success means, but also our beliefs about the meaning and purpose of a liberal education and our view of the role that higher education should play in the larger society. 

To speak of success means very little and makes little sense unless we also consider the issue of success to what end. In other words, our beliefs about student success are closely tied to our beliefs about the purposes of education and the role of higher education in the society. The problem is not just with our beliefs about these matters, but also that these beliefs remain largely unexamined and unexposed while we discuss and debate the educational policies and practices that emanate from them. 

Why we are educating our students has to do with the relationship between higher education and society. But different people hold very different views about this relationship, and it's important that we expose and identify and recognize and honor these different views. An extreme view, which would probably be endorsed by only a small number of hard core academic elitists, such as perhaps Robert Maynard Hutchins, is that the university should remain walled off from the external world of practical affairs, so students can learn and study, and faculty can pursue truth undisturbed by worldly distractions. 

And I would call this the ivory tower view of what we're all about. Now, the ivory tower concept might have a certain appeal for some of my academic colleagues. And I must admit I know a few for whom it has a great deal of appeal. It could not and never will represent a viable conception of higher education and its role in modern American society. Like it or not, higher education is a creature of society, is sanctioned and supported by that society, and has, in turn, pledged itself to serve that society in its mission statements, in its catalogs, and other public pronouncements. In other words, we're sort of on the hook here in our rhetoric. 

An alternative belief system, which seems to dominate in discussions of educational policy these days is what I perhaps un-charitably like to call the pegboard view of what we're trying to do. Under the pegboard view, student success is judged in terms of how prepared the student is for work. The pegboard view also is what drives what I like to call the-- the competitiveness argument. So I'll put these up here together, because they are twins. 

This is the dominant belief system, not only of our captains of industry, but also most politicians and policy makers, not to mention many students, teachers, and parents. The idea here is that higher education must deliver more people with expertise in science, technology, and modern management techniques, so that America's economy can remain competitive with the economies of Western Europe and especially with the emerging economies on the Pacific Rim. 

My main problem with the pegboard and competitiveness views is that they represent an extremely limited conception, not only of the role of higher education, but also of what the larger society is all about. When we consider the major problems plaguing our society, it's very difficult to imagine how the pegboard view and the competitiveness view are going to contribute much to this. Simply to fill job slots in the labor market certainly is not going to do the trick when it comes to dealing with problems such as our decaying inner cities, to our racial problems, to the inequities in the distribution of wealth and so forth. 

Now, a close cousin of the pegboard view is what I like to call the private economic benefit view, or the consumer viewpoint about what we're all about. And this particular viewpoint argues that the purpose of higher education is to enable people to lead more affluent and comfortable lives. And a lot of politicians like to advocate this view as sort of a populist view as they see it, where the more education you get, the more money you can make, and even rationalize it in terms of arguments having to do with productivity. 

Even if we were to accept the argument that private economic benefits provide the main justification for our existence as educational institutions, this particular belief system is extremely limited because it has little to say about how society as a whole is served by such an approach. In other words, while it may be a laudible goal to contribute to the economic comfort and well-being of those citizens who are fortunate enough to enter and complete higher education, this viewpoint has little to say about what's going to happen to people who don't go to college or complete college. 

Nor, does it say anything about how, if at all, the many other social and economic problems that I've mentioned earlier will be addressed by such an approach. An entirely different kind of belief system as implied in the various public pronouncements that I've already alluded to that we make in our mission statements and catalogs and the presidential state of the college reports and so forth. In many ways, these sometimes lofty statements come as close as anything to John Dewey's conception of the proper role of education in society. 

If we were to study the mission statements-- in fact, some of our graduate students have done this-- the mission statements of a randomly selected group of American higher educational institutions, we would seldom, if ever, find any mention of private economic benefits, international competitiveness, or filling slots in the labor market. On the contrary, when it comes to describing its educational mission, the typical college or university will use, such language as preparing students for responsible citizenship, developing character, developing future leaders, preparing students to serve society, and so on. 

In other words, if we were to believe our own rhetoric, those of us who work in the Academy see ourselves as serving the society and of promoting and strengthening our particular form of democratic self-government. We might refer to this as the citizenship or the service concept of our mission. While such a belief system does not preclude individual economic benefits or filling slots in the labor market or enhancing economic competitiveness, the central focus is on responsible citizenship and service. 

The citizenship view, I would argue, implies a much broader conception of student success than do the other views. Clearly, the manner in which we approach this issue of student success will depend heavily on which of these belief systems we embrace. Success implies one thing if we see ourselves simply as helping young people to lead more comfortable and affluent lives, but quite another thing if we see ourselves as working together to strengthen our society and our democracy. Given the current state of our democracy and our society, I would argue that we have no choice but to embrace this view. 

The problem, of course, is that if you look at the typical American college or university, its curriculum and its co-curriculum, its teaching and personnel practices, and the values that govern its administrative policies, it's very difficult to find much evidence of a core commitment to preparing students for responsible citizenship. Most institutions have simply not put their citizenship and service commitment into practice. 

Despite the growing interest in service and civic engagement within the Academy-- and this is a very healthy development, it seems to me-- there is a lot more we can do to renew and revitalize civic engagement and democracy in the US. In the classroom, for example, we can start giving more attention to the development of those personal qualities, which are crucial to civic life and effective democratic self-government. 

And by this, I mean qualities such as self-understanding. You know, that's kind of at the basis of all the great philosophical and religious traditions. Where is it in the curriculum? I have a hard time finding it. Self-understanding. Listening skills, leadership, empathy, honesty, generosity, the ability to work collaboratively. 

Most of these qualities exemplify aspects of what Daniel Goleman would call emotional intelligence. We can also begin to introduce the concept of civic responsibility and citizenship into faculty discussions of curricular reform. Such a shift in our curricular discussions would be easy to justify, given the fact that, as I've said, our catalogs and mission statements are all full of that kind of rhetoric. 

And given some very promising current developments in the curricula area-- and I'm thinking here of the emphasis on multiculturalism and the environment just as two examples-- we can also build on these efforts by introducing general education content that focuses more directly on issues of contemporary American civic life and democracy. And what do I mean by this? 

The central role of information and the mass media theory of democracy says if you don't have an informed electorate, it doesn't work. Well, I don't think the mass media are exactly without problems in this area. The possible causes of declining civic engagement and declining trust in government, the escalating role of money in politics, the growing corporate influence, and so on. There's a long list of these. And we can do much more to institutionalize service learning, both in the general education curriculum and in the major, and I think we should all do this, and those who complain that requiring service diminishes it, all I can say is do we diminish English Comp by requiring it? We require what we value. So we make a value statement when we require something with students. 

What I'm really suggesting here is that we can begin to broaden our conception of student success to include a genuine commitment on the part of the institution to renewing civic life and civic engagement in American society. And we can manifest that commitment by embracing significant changes in our curricula, teaching practices, reward system, community relations, and most importantly, in the values and beliefs that guide our policies and practices. 

I might add here that our narrow definition of student success is, in many ways, parallel to our narrow approach to defining faculty success. In the research universities, we pay lip service to the importance of teaching, mentoring, and university service, but the fact is that the faculty success is defined nearly exclusively in many places in terms of research and scholarship. By default, important faculty talents, like good colleague-ship, which are so critical to creating a real academic community get little or no weight in judging the professional success of our colleagues. 

In my patent lecture on Tuesday evening, I discussed our traditional beliefs about what makes our institutions excellent. And forgive me for repeating myself, but there are a lot more people here this afternoon, so at least I better refresh your memory. And this is, of course, the gospel according to Sandy, so I don't mind preaching at once more. 

Most of us define our excellence in terms either of the resources that we have-- and I've got a new chart here for you guys who were here Tuesday evening. This is an equation. Now I'm getting quantitative about this. Where we define our excellence in terms of what we have and what others think of us. This is what I would call the egocentric approach to defining excellence. 

And while there's nothing inherently wrong, we have to have resources to function. We have to have reputations to attract students and faculty. When we concentrate on these as the end, as the ultimate definition of our excellence, we, again, diminish and devalue student learning. And as I had argued Tuesday night, that what we really need to move toward is a concept of excellence that's based on how effectively we're able to educate our students, but effectiveness and student success being seen in much broader terms. 

My concern about the reputational and resources conception is that they fail to address directly our basic societal purposes of teaching and public service, not that we don't need these resources and reputation. But paradoxically, it can also cause us to neglect our research mission-- this is the irony of it-- because we become more focused on acquiring research talent than in nurturing and developing the research talent that's already there. 

The roots of three of our most intractable problems in academia, I would argue, can be found in this preoccupation with resource acquisition and reputational enhancement. Let me just quickly review these, because they're familiar to all of us. And yet, we don't normally think about them in terms of how they are products of our belief system about what makes us excellent. For example, the valuing of research over teaching and the struggle between equity and excellence and the issue of individualism versus community are all in one way or another connected to our beliefs about the importance of acquiring more resources and enhancing our reputation. 

We value research more than teaching, because we believe that outstanding scientists and scholars will add more to our reputation and resources than will outstanding teachers or mentors. And when we define our excellence in terms of the test scores of the entering students, the high scoring student being viewed here as a resource, which I find interesting, that enhances our reputation. We set our sense of excellence in direct conflict with our desire to promote educational opportunities for those groups in our society whose test scores put them at a competitive disadvantage. 

Finally, when we place the highest value on the individual scholarly accomplishments of our students and faculty, we reinforce their competitive and individualistic tendencies, making it very difficult for them to develop those qualities that help promote a sense of community on the campus. And again, I mean good colleagueship, collaboration, community service, citizenship, and social responsibility. 

These latter qualities, of course, are the same ones that are needed to make any democracy work. If we really mean it when we claim that education is our central mission, then student learning should be at the heart of our conception of excellence. I like to call this the civic or talent development view of what our mission is all about. 

However, even if we accept this talent development view, we still need to answer the question, which talents and to what end. As I consider all the ways in which our traditional beliefs about excellence and student success interfere with our ability to improve and strengthen civic life in American society, no problem strikes me as being more important than the education of the so-called remedial or underprepared student. 

Now, by examining this issue in some depth, we can begin to see how it might be possible for higher education institutions not only to broaden our conception of student success, but also to become more effective agents of positive social change. If we fail to develop more effective interventions for our so-called remedial or developmental students, we'll find it very difficult to make much headway in resolving some of our most pressing social and economic problems. And by this, I mean unemployment, crime, welfare, health care, racial tensions, the maldistribution of wealth, and citizen disengagement from the political process. 

I say this first, because underprepared students have historically been the ones most likely to drop out at any level of education, and second, because persons with relatively low levels of educational attainment account for a disproportionate number of welfare recipients, prison inmates, poor people, the unemployed, and people who don't vote. Beyond this, the issue of race relations and affirmative action are intimately connected to the issue of under preparation, since we have created a competitive hierarchical system, which dispenses privilege on the basis of measures. Here we come again with the success measures, the GPA and the test scores that put our two largest racial minority groups at a competitive disadvantage. 

If our educational system allocated its resources more equitably across these various groups by socioeconomic and race measures, there would be little need for affirmative action. It goes without saying that the underprepared student is a kind of pariah in American higher education, and some of the reasons are obvious. 

Since most of us believe that our excellence depends on enrolling more and more of the very best prepared students, to admit underprepared students would pose a real threat to our sense of excellence. Why would any sane institution want to do this? But, here, the public institutions encounter a bit of a dilemma, since the law in many states requires that at least some underprepared students be given an opportunity to pursue post-secondary education. 

How can this be done so we don't put our excellence at risk? The answer, of course, is that we've created hierarchical public systems, where the least well prepared students are consigned either to community colleges or to relatively non-selective public colleges. And when selective institutions find themselves forced to admit a few underprepared students, for example, to maintain competitiveness in Division 1A athletics-- and trust me on this, there ain't nobody more underprepared than Division 1A revenue sports athletes-- they likewise avoid having much contact with these students by hiring part time tutors and part time instructors from the outside to do the work. 

These tracking practices exert a subtle, but powerful influence on the attitudes and beliefs of our students and, indeed, of the-- larger society who are probably going to be influenced much more by what we do in our admissions process, for example, than by what we say about such things as equality of opportunity or multiculturalism or educational equity. 

By practicing selective admissions using these narrowly defined measures of student success, we're sending important value messages. We don't value the education of the students with the lower scores. And we send this message not only to our own students, but also to the remedial students, whom we reject, to those who must teach them, and to the larger society. 

No wonder that teaching underprepared students is viewed as unglamorous, unimportant, and in many institutions, demeaning. Why do underprepared students make us so uncomfortable? Is it just that they're more difficult to teach-- which I believe they are-- and that their presence on campus threatens our sense of excellence? Or are there deeper reasons? 

While our beliefs about student success and the importance of resource acquisition and reputational enhancement are fairly obvious-- we can see these upon a little bit of reflection-- there are other beliefs that we harbor as academics and that have tremendous effects on our practices that are largely unacknowledged, much less critically examined. 

In one of these beliefs-- and forgive me if those of you who read my chronicle of higher education tirade on this-- one of these beliefs I like to characterize as the importance of being smart. Now, this may sound flippant, but I think if you think about it for a while, particularly in terms of your experience in this institution or any other, perhaps you'll see a little of what I mean. 

There are many other terms I could use for smart. I could say brilliance, creativity, intelligence, and so forth. But for the purposes of our discussion here, I'll use the more flippant term smartness. My many years as a scholar of higher education, as an employee of a research university, not unlike this one, convinces me that much of our fear of remedial students and much of our unwillingness to get involved in educating them can be traced to our uncritical acceptance of this belief and to the fact that most of us are not even consciously aware of the power and scope of its influence. 

Most of us clearly favor our brightest students, not only in admissions, but in the award of financial aid and also in the classroom. If bright students enroll at our institutions and take our classes, then this reflects well on our own brightness. Surely, we must be smart if our students are so smart. 

But if our students are not so smart, then this reflects poorly on us. This may help to explain why so many academics keep a very close eye on the average test scores of the entering freshmen. If our students are getting smarter, then we're reassured about our own smartness. But if they're getting dumber, our sense of our own smartness is threatened. No wonder we hire others to teach remedial students or simply avoid them altogether through selective admissions. 

The real problem here is that we value being smart much more than we do developing smartness. In our relentless and largely unconscious preoccupation with being smart, we forget that our institution's primary mission is to develop intellectual capacities and other capacities of our students not merely to select and certify those whose intellectual talents are already well-developed by the time they come to us. 

This preoccupation with being smart is also part of the reason why we continue to use measures of student success, the GPA, and the standardized test score that are geared to ranking and rating students, rather than to reflecting how much they're actually learning. We all know students who get A's in our courses who didn't put out any effort and who didn't learn much, but they were very smart and very bright and very clever when they came to us, and they were able to get through our exams. 

I've already suggested that these assessment devices, particularly the standardized test, imply a very narrow standard of smartness. But they're also of little value, either in helping students to learn, or in helping us to evaluate the success of our pedagogical efforts. We inflicted this same normative approach to assessing students on the lower schools, such that politicians and the public now evaluate the quality of these schools simply on the basis of which ones have the smartest students, rather than on the basis of which ones are the most effective educationally. And I mean effective even in terms of this narrow standard of smartness. 

This approach not only does violence to the wonderful diversity of student talents by forcing them all onto a single continuum, but it also has the effect of sending a message to the relatively low scoring student, you're dumb, you're lazy, you're not college material. It's no wonder so many students drop out of the educational system before they ever reach college age. 

A simplistic yardstick like the SAT or the ACT is used by many of us as the principal indicator of the student's ability or smartness. But by doing this, we implicitly diminish the great social and cultural importance of these citizenship talents that I've mentioned, such as empathy, self-understanding, honesty, responsibility, leadership, and the ability to work collaboratively. 

I might add here that this narrow approach to defining and assessing talent or merit has been turned against us with considerable success by the opponents of affirmative action. I think it'll be very difficult to challenge these traditional notions about student success and educational excellence unless we do it collectively. While American colleges and universities can be justifiably proud of their diversity and their autonomy, a collection of 3,000 institutions simply doing their individual things, does not necessarily make for a coherent or effective system. 

The problem is not that we're all so wonderfully different and diverse, but rather that the sum total of our individual uncoordinated efforts doesn't always add up to a meaningful whole. What I'm really asking here is if we're going to persist in defining our excellence solely in institutional terms, or are we going to be willing to bite the bullet and take a systems perspective? And let me see if I can explain what I mean by this. 

Unless we can sit down together and collectively begin to discuss our systems responsibilities toward the society, our efforts to become excellent as individual institutions will continue to thwart our efforts to achieve real educational excellence as a system. If nothing else, an extended inter-institutional conversation about the issues that I've been mentioning here at the systems level would make it clear that all of us in higher education, not to mention the rest of the society, have a heavy stake in broadening our conception of student success and in redefining our concept of what makes us excellent, and in particular, on the priority that we must assign to the effective education of the underprepared student. 

At the state and systems and local levels, we have to sit down together, all types of institutions, and begin a serious discussion of our mutual ambivalence about remediation and under preparation. These institutional conversations could also cover a number of other related issues that cry out for collaborative effort, coordination, and expansion of community service, and service learning programs, community needs, local governmental problems, diversity and multiculturalism, sharing of resources, admissions, transfer credits and so forth. 

But the one that cries out most urgently for attention is the underprepared or remedial student. The necessity for us to move away from a purely competitive and individualistic mindset, what's good for our institution, and to adopt more of a collaborative or consortial approach to defining student success into the under preparation problem, becomes clearer when we consider what might happen if one of us were to try to go it alone. 

As long as the different colleges and universities in the state continue to operate independently and to persist in their traditional beliefs about excellence-- and in the case of IU, I would say not just the state, but a region, the big 10 region-- any institution automatically puts its excellence at risk if it unilaterally decides to broaden its conception of success and to admit substantially greater numbers of underprepared students, or to invest substantially more of its resources in educating such students. 

If we could be successful in stimulating the kinds of systems discussions of these issues that I'm envisioning here, the conversation would soon begin to focus on the various arguments that we traditionally use to defend selective admissions. For example, a frequently used defense is what I like to call the prediction argument. 

Now, to put this in a nutshell, the prediction argument says that we defend the use of these narrow conceptions of student talent and success, the GPA and the test score, on the grounds that they predict performance in college. And indeed, they do predict, but the prediction is less than ideal. But they do predict. And this is undeniably the case. 

Now, imagine what would happen if our medical health care system were to take the same approach to its admissions policies. And I draw a parallel here between medicine and health care on the one hand and education on the other, because we're always using industrial analogs. And the prediction argument makes sense in the case of a business that's trying to compete with other businesses and it wants to hire the best talent to exploit that talent for its own purposes to succeed in competition. 

But this model simply doesn't make sense for education, and I think by illustrating this with a medical analog, you can see what I mean. Because under that kind of a system, we would have a large number of hospitals and clinics that are underfunded, that are poorly staffed, that have poor facilities, and that enroll the sickest patients. We would then have a smaller group of instead of clinics and hospitals that would have better facilities and better paid staff and so forth, which admitted patients with moderately severe illnesses. 

And then we would have a small group of elite clinics and hospitals with the best paid and best trained staff and all the best and most modern equipment, which admitted only patients with common colds. And that would make a lot of sense in a health care system. 

What public interest, what civic interest is served by concentrating the least well-prepared students in the institutions with the least resources? How can such an arrangement be rationalized in terms of the larger interests of the community in the society. The fact of the matter is that it can't. To see why this is so, we can, again, use an analogy for medicine. And I think in the case of medicine, we would create a massive number of untreated or poorly treated people, who would then cause us to go broke, if you will, trying to rehabilitate them. 

They wouldn't be capable of working. Their families would break up. They'd go broke trying to pay for their treatment on a private basis and so forth. So it seems to me that in just the same way that not valuing the education of the underprepared student, by the way we structure our institutions, we're creating the same kind of problem for ourselves later on. 

Now if we took more of a systems approach to defining student success and confronting the problem of under preparation, it's important to keep in mind that our greatest untapped resource may be the students themselves. There's probably no other group that's better suited to tutoring underprepared students than they're better prepared peers. If such peer tutoring could be built into the curriculum in a systematic fashion, everyone would benefit. 

More pedagogical resources would be invested in the education of the underprepared and the better prepared students would have an opportunity to master course material in greater depth by teaching it to others. As I've said in a couple of meetings earlier today, I don't think I get dumber teaching students who don't know what I know. Maybe I do. If such a mentoring and tutoring program were expanded to include a variety of service learning opportunities, for example, for students to work with underprepared students in the public schools, the bonds between higher education and the local community would be greatly strengthened. 

The problems that are plaguing our contemporary democracy are, in many respects, the same problems that de Tocqueville identified more than a century and a half ago, and that is the tension between individualism and community. And it's acted out at the institutional level by our individual competitiveness and quest for greater excellence. We want to move up in the pecking order and push others down. This tension is exacerbated by the mistaken belief that we are independent of and separate from each other. 

Even our most recent research on students, some of which I talked about Tuesday night, highlights the importance of community. The single most important source of influence on the individual student turns out to be the peer group. In light of the reduced funding and other external pressures that we are experiencing today, it seems only fair to ask, do we have the wherewithal to undertake the kinds of new ventures I've been suggesting this afternoon? 

In our haste to man the barricades, to defend ourselves against external threats, we're inclined to forget that the autonomy that we seek to protect may be the most powerful tool that we have for reshaping our notions of student success and institutional excellence, more in the direction of promoting democracy and citizenship. There is nobody standing in our way of doing this except ourselves. The fact remains-- and this is what we tend to forget-- that we still retain control over practically all of the decisions that really matter, whom to admit and how to admit them, what courses and what work to require of our students, what to teach, how to teach it, how we assess and evaluate our students, how we define their success, how we structure our co-curricular programs, how we hire, reward, and tenure our colleagues, what policies and procedures we use to govern ourselves, and what subject matter we choose in our research. 

In closing, I'd like to emphasize once more than how we define success and how we define excellence is really a matter of our values and beliefs. The initial challenge for academia at this point is not so much to abandon or change these traditional beliefs, but simply to become more conscious of them and of their effect on our policies and practices in our professional lives. It's one thing to embrace beliefs that don't serve us well, but quite another to be largely unaware of their influence in our lives. 

This kind of reflective inquiry into our values and beliefs is sorely needed in academia. For the past few years, we've been working with a group of academics from across the country to explore issues related to meaning, purpose, and spirituality in academic work. And what we found is despite all of the claims that we are objective, detached scholars, many, indeed most of us, want to talk about these issues. But we don't have the venues. We don't have the opportunities. 

The problem is that academic institutions as currently structured offer few such opportunities for these conversations around values and beliefs. And many institutions actively discourage it. I believe in an open inquiry into our most deeply felt values and beliefs to our narrow approach to defining student success and our preoccupation with acquiring resources and enhancing reputation being smart, and being seen by others as smart has affected practically everything we do and that many of these effects are contrary not only to our best interests as academics, but also to the educational mission of our institution and the larger society. 

We need to begin a serious discussion of why we persist in defining success so narrowly and why we have come to worship merely being smart as opposed to the value of developing smartness. And we need to consider our concept of smartness so that it encompasses many of those qualities that promote civic life and social responsibility. Such discussions and reflections will almost certainly serve us well, not only in our efforts to affect meaningful reforms in our approach to educating underprepared students and educating students in general toward greater civic responsibility, but also to our desire to lead more authentic and productive lives as academics. Thanks very much. 

[APPLAUSE] 

Do you want to hook that for me? That's all right. I can do it. 

SPEAKER 1: If you can hear me, here-- we'll take question answers now. But just a couple of announcements before-- just a couple of announcements before we take the question for Dr. Astin. You have heard about service, and I asked Dick McKay, who provides 100% service to students on this campus. No fitting person now than Dick to make these announcements. 

DICK MCKAY: Thank you, Professor [INAUDIBLE]. I just wanted to quickly remind you and hope that many of you in the room in fact are here as a part of the 17th annual spring symposium on Promoting Student Success, Fostering Academic Achievement, and Increasing Persistence to Graduation. Program, again this year, is being sponsored by Debbie Fein and the Office of Afro-American along-- or, I'm sorry, Office of Academic Affairs. [INAUDIBLE] automatically I'm putting all kinds of messages together. I apologize. Office of the Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs and the Office of the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs to once again create an environment where we can come together to talk about issues in student learning and campus climate. 

There is a reception after this program at 5:30 for all of those who are at this lecture today and are also going to be a part of the symposium. And then tomorrow, we have a whole series of programs, beginning here at 9:00 and then carrying on through the day with, actually, three sets of concurrent sessions, over 17 different presentations, involving 45 different themes, involving colleagues from around the campus telling you what they're doing in the classroom and what they're doing outside the classroom to make the university environment in Bloomington as stimulating and educational experience as it can possibly be for our students. 

So if you wandered into the lecture this afternoon and didn't necessarily know this was also part of a symposium, registration is instantaneous. You're all registered. And now, you can-- we're very quick. We're a very friendly operation. You can now participate in these programs. And I would guess, Suzanne, we have copies of the schedule just outside the door? Uh-- 

AUDIENCE: Tomorrow morning. 

DICK MCKAY: Tomorrow morning we'll have them outside the door. So at 8:15 in the morning, you can show up here for a continental breakfast and then get a schedule of the day's programs and activities. And we hope to see at least as many folks in the morning as we have here now. We'll start with a panel presentation and then move into the various topics of the day. So thank you for coming to the Patten Lecture this afternoon, but thank you also for participating in this symposium. 

And now we're going to go back to questions. And, Sandy, I'll turn the microphone back to you, and take some questions from the audience. 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Sure. Yes? 

AUDIENCE: I'm fascinated that you acknowledge that beliefs are an important part of higher education, and as you suggest that our policy should reflect-- 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: It might be better to come down here, because I don't think the acoustics-- can you hear him? Yes and no. Yeah, come on. 

AUDIENCE: Do you have the cords? 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: There's plenty of cords, so. 

AUDIENCE: My question concerns your emphasis on beliefs. And I'm wondering, when you suggest that our policies and institutions of higher learning should reflect certain beliefs, how you make the decision which beliefs are included and which aren't. Because you said honesty is an important belief for education, but if I, as a Christian, would say we should be honest because the Lord Jesus Christ says let your yea be yea and your nay be nay, that would probably be considered anathema to the higher education system that I've experienced. So how do you make that decision which values are worked into policy and which ones are not? 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: That's very good question. And I think the example you gave-- I think there's a distinction between what kinds of success you espouse becoming more honest, valuing honesty more, and the reasons why you espouse it. We each have our own reasons for this. And I think that's less important than we have some kind of collective discussion to see what our common values are. And I've suggested that some of these do have to do with the human qualities that make for effective parents and effective citizens. And we know with some of these are. 

And it seems to me, whether we are trying to or not, we do, in fact, develop some of these talents. But we don't do very explicitly. Our research on students indicates, for example, that leadership skills are developed fairly well in some kinds of institutions, but not necessarily as a result of some kind of conscious intention to do so. This is a byproduct. 

AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. It seems to me that what you've done is describe the problem. It's sort of like the-- the steerman on the Titanic seeing the iceberg, uh, on the horizon. The boat is headed. The bird is there. Um, but you haven't suggested the means by which to avoid the crash. I'm specifically thinking about an institution like Indiana University, which is funded through significant contribution from the state, the funding of individual students, funded through significant contributions of the national government. 

We control an awful lot, as you point out, of the important formatives of success, but we don't have the money in our pockets. We don't have the wealth to be independent. And the system is more complex than your description. And I'm curious as to how you would propose beginning to turn the ship. 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Well, if you just take two issues, uh, of, uh, curriculum content and pedagogical technique as two examples, where we have almost free reign, particularly in the general education program, to design this any way we want. As a matter of fact, this is one of those unusual universities where that responsibility for general education is vested more in the departments. It's an odd-- not odd, maybe unusual way to put it. There are other institutions that do this. And that gives certain decentralization of the general education program. 

But the point is that sitting down collectively and discussing both the content and the teaching methods that we use in the light of this broader conception of student success might indeed lead us to make some major revisions in the curriculum content and the teaching techniques. That's what I have in mind. Collaborative learning, for example-- and the evidence in that's pretty compelling. and service learning-- both underutilized techniques that have, it seems to me, obvious relevance to these issues of democracy and citizenship and, uh-- and community. 

AUDIENCE: It's exciting, at the least, to hear this societal can of worms being opened. But, um, I want-- of all of the things that you've said, the one that-- the two that comes to mind to me is the fact that students can teach other students. 

I am a tutor. And I tutor adult students who have-- who've-- who've been failed by our system in the past, now think that they have collectively learned how-- I can go back. And they're so often disappointed. I get them then after they have failed and sometimes learned some concept. 

And rather than spend most of my time in course material, I spend all of the time in my tutoring in preparation-- 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Yeah. 

AUDIENCE: --and behavior. And I wonder how much research we're actually doing that uses students, instead of looking at students, or judging by their results, actually spend time-- and I-- I-- not just at higher education, certainly, even at lower levels, uh, where students who excel, excel more by teaching others. And so then we concentrate on the question of how we learn. 

And I wonder if there is money being spent-- and perhaps maybe you could describe some-- where we're actually involving the process of students teaching other students, and how that enhances the whole. 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Yeah, th-- there are many examples of, uh, very effective collaborative learning, which is what students teaching students is all about. That's one model. 

Uh, peer tutoring is another model. But they all capitalize on-- on the win-win game aspect of this, where both the, uh, student who's teaching or tutoring, and the tutee, or the student who's the rec-- recipient benefit from this. So we literally create more educational resources by going in the direction of peer tutoring and collaborative learning. 

And, uh, it-- there are other aspects to this that are critical as well. What do we symbolize in our institution when we put a high value on teaching each other, when we put a high value on our best students helping the slower students, or in the case of service learning, where-- where we put a high value on learning, which includes serving others? And what's-- what's remarkable about-- about the research on this is that it appears that both collaborative learning and service learning are better forms of instruction in terms of the extent of student learning and development. 

And as it turns out, they do have positive effects, both of these approaches, on some of these citizenship qualities I was talking about, such as leadership, which is tremendously enhanced by participating in community service as part of a course. Students learn how to get things done. They learn how to work together collaboratively to make things happen. 

And that-- that's a very empowering experience, as well as an opportunity to really check out the theoretical course content as to how it plays out in the real world. And sometimes they-- they discover it doesn't play out very well, much to the chagrin of us. But, uh, um-- 

[CHUCKLES] 

SPEAKER 2: Way back in there. 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Way back here, yeah. 

AUDIENCE: Could you comment about the role that the current tenure process has to achieve the goals that you're talking about? 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Uh. 

[CHUCKLING] 

Uh, I think, uh, that, uh, the value of tenure is limited by the way that we conceive of it and use it, frankly. But, you know, like for me, I sort of find myself biting the hand that feeds me a lot, you know, coming from UCLA and talking this way. 

AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: And I really wonder if I would be so, uh, uh, blunt about some of these things if I didn't have tenure. I don't know. It's a good question. 

Uh, I'm not sure. I'd like to think that it wouldn't make any difference. But I don't know. 

Um, the problem with tenure is that the people who most need it don't have it. That's-- that's-- that's the problem, is that our youngest, most vulnerable people, the assistant professors, I don't know who would want to be an assistant professor, actually, anymore in a research university. Um, seems like our doctoral students want to do that. But I really, I wonder about that, because in a-- in some ways, it's kind of an untenable situation. 

But, uh, so these-- these folks are really threatened and intimidated by the process, because they don't have any protection. And they really do steer their research and their collegial behavior, uh, very gingerly. At least, that's my experience with assistant professors. 

Um, so I-- I don't know. Tenure, unfortunately, has been represented as job security. And I don't think that's really-- was ever the intent of it. But that seems to be the way that it's been seen. And-- and its connection to academic freedom seems to have been largely lost. 

But for me, that's the only value of tenure, really, is-- is, uh, to protect academic freedom. And whether it does, I got some questions about it. So, um, yeah. 

AUDIENCE: Um, about, uh, four years ago, there was a study. I think it was by Jacobs. And I think the book was They Went to College. 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Uh-huh. 

AUDIENCE: And the effect of that book was, um, looking at, uh, people who had gone to college versus not gone to college, who, uh, as a 18-year-old looked pretty much to be the same kind of people. And, uh, 20 years later, uh, there was no difference between those that attended four years of college and those that dropped out and didn't, except, uh, as I recall, um, the college graduates did more beer drinking, uh, for obvious reasons, and, uh, made more money, because they became doctors and lawyers and engineers. 

But in terms of, uh, most kinds of things that you call civic responsibility-- 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: There was no difference. 

AUDIENCE: --my question is, has that ever been followed up? And is there anything current, which really shows it makes a difference if one goes to a university? 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Yeah, the question had to do with Jacobs's much-cited book, uh, based on research done in the, uh, '50s, I believe, '50s and early '60s, uh, uh, which, uh, concluded, among other things, that colleges really don't change people's values very much. And, uh, uh, that's not what we find. But what we do find is that the source of that effect on values is not what we like to think it is, and I think for a lot of reasons. 

The source of the influence is very heavily the peer group. Uh, and, uh, fortunately, there's some measurable faculty influence on this. But the peer group is a major source of influence on the students' values. 

And, uh, uh, and also, the service-learning experience, which Jacobs had no opportunity to study, has a profound effect on certain values. Um, commitment to-- for example, commitment to promoting racial understanding is-- is strongly influenced by, uh, participation in community service, a commitment to, um, uh, basically the notion of wanting to be a social change agent. The sense that you can make a difference, that-- that belief is strengthened, because most students don't think they can make a difference. 

Uh, but those who have the opportunity to, uh, experience service learning actually strengthen their belief that they-- they can make a difference, or abandon their belief that they can't. 

I see any other hands? I-- I apologize for my kind of fumbling around here. There was no light on my papers. And I'm-- I was really struggling to see my notes. 

[CHUCKLES] 

So I apologize for that. But I-- it was tough to see them. Uh, so I kind of fumbled around a few times there. 

Uh, but I can't see in the back here. That's what I associated to. Any other hands? Ah, here's one. 

AUDIENCE: I'll ask another question. 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: All right. 

AUDIENCE: As a student, one of the problems I see is that students don't want to learn, because they're not taking advantage of the resources offered. Do you find that in your research? 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Yeah, uh, th-- this is part of the trends I talked about on Tuesday night, that-- that the students are not-- the students coming to college today are less inclined to see the college experience for its intrinsic value. That is the joy of learning, and the joy of self-development, and this sort of thing. It's just, that's just the way the students are. 

And yet we don't seem to have acknowledged that and adjusted what we do to that reality. Uh, and I'm talking in relative terms now. There are plenty of students who-- who-- who are, you know, very inclined to get engaged. There are just not as many as there used to be, and more students who-- who are not. 

And that's part of the kind of excessive materialism of the society, as I see it, the idea that the reason you go to college is to get a better job and make more money. And that has to do again with these different conceptions of higher education-- you know, the competitiveness argument, the peg board view, and so forth. And if we embrace those viewpoints, then, of course, we're just reinforcing these problems. 

But, uh, I think the issue of engaging students who are here for instrumental reasons, uh, is a real challenge. But we have some ways of doing it. And I was-- I talked about some of those-- those techniques Tuesday night. 

But-- and we've mentioned a couple today. Collaborative learning is very engaging, because students know their work is going to be scrutinized by their peers. And they take responsibility for their peers', uh, learning, to a certain extent. 

Same thing with, uh, uh, uh, community service work done in the context of a course, uh, is that there-- there is-- there is a, uh, tremendous peer group effect here of, um, basically trying to collaboratively provide a meaningful service to, uh, to others. And that's a very powerful experience for students. 

Just talk to students who have had service learning experience. It's pretty impressive. And faculty members, for that matter. Try it. You'll like it. 

[CHUCKLING] Yeah. 

AUDIENCE: I was just wondering what kind of reception you get from colleges when you propose this, because we've talked a lot about this in our matching program. Um, you know, equity to education is just [INAUDIBLE]. We just, a lot of times, come to the conclusion that colleges are going to change, but society's not going to change. 

So a Harvard [INAUDIBLE] Harvard. What do people say to you when you propose this? 

ALEXANDER ASTIN: Well, I'm not trying to change Harvard. That's, uh, beyond-- 

[CHUCKLING] 

That's beyond anybody's, uh, uh, capabilities. Um, but, uh, see, again, we're talking about beliefs here. This is a really interesting issue, uh, is that if you don't believe you can change the place, that's a self-fulfilling prophecy. I mean, think about it. Think how much effort you're going to exert on behalf of a change effort if you don't think it's going to work. 

It's very interesting. Beliefs become self-fulfilling prophecies. I mean, they literally, uh, shape your experience. You know, we think experience shapes beliefs, but it works the other way as well, you know? So we behave as-- so that our experience will support our beliefs, because if our beliefs weren't supported by our experience, we'd go crazy. 

And-- and so it seems to me that if we believe we can change our institutions, we can damn sure do it, because we have the tools. Uh, it's a learning process. It'll happen slowly. And resistance to change efforts in an institution is the best evidence that you're making progress. That's the paradox of resistance. 

SPEAKER 1: [INAUDIBLE]. Let us thank Dr. Astin for a wonderful lecture. 

[APPLAUSE] 

Um, please join him at the reception in the University Club. And if you have questions to ask him privately, personally, um, just take the opportunity. Thank you for coming. 

[SIDE CONVERSATION] 

